Dutch language - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 





 
 
		 
		 
		 
			 
			 
						 
						 Dutch language 
			 
								 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
								 
												 
					Jump to:					 navigation , 					 search 
				 
				 
 
 Dutch 
 
 
 Flemish 
 
 
 Nederlands, Vlaams 
 
 
 Pronunciation 
  &#160;(  listen ) 
 
 
 Native&#160;to 
 Mainly the Netherlands , Belgium , and Suriname ; also in Aruba , Curaçao , Sint Maarten , as well as France ( French Flanders ). 
 
 
 Region 
 mainly Western Europe , today also in South America and the Caribbean . 
 
 
 
 Native speakers 
 
 23 million &#160;(2006)  
Total: 28 million  
 (excluding Afrikaans speakers) 
 
 
 
 Language family 
 
 
 Indo-European 
 
 Germanic 
 
 West Germanic 
 
 Low Franconian 
 
 Dutch 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Early forms 
 
 
 Old Dutch 
 
 Middle Dutch 
 
 Dutch 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Writing system 
 
 Latin ( Dutch alphabet ) 
 Dutch Braille 
 
 
 
 Signed form(s) 
 
 Signed Dutch (Nederlands met Gebaren) 
 
 
 Official status 
 
 
 
 Official language&#160;in 
 
 &#160; Aruba 
 &#160; Belgium 
 &#160; Curaçao 
 &#160; Netherlands 
 &#160; Sint Maarten 
 &#160; Suriname 
  Benelux 
  European Union 
  Union of South American Nations 
 
 
 
 Recognised minority language&#160;in 
 
 &#160; South Africa 
 &#160; Namibia 
 &#160; Indonesia 
 
 
 Regulated&#160;by 
 Nederlandse Taalunie 
( Dutch Language Union ) 
 
 
 Language codes 
 
 
 ISO 639-1 
 nl 
 
 
 ISO 639-2 
 dut &#160;(B) 
 nld &#160;(T) 
 
 
 ISO 639-3 
 Variously: 
 nld &#160;–&#160;Dutch/ Flemish 
 vls &#160;–&#160; West Flemish (Vlaams) 
 zea &#160;–&#160; Zealandic (Zeeuws) 
 lim &#160;–&#160; Limburgish (Limburgs) 
 
 
 Linguasphere 
 52-ACB-a (varieties: 
52-ACB-aa to -an) 
 
 
 
 Dutch-speaking world. Dutch is also one of the official languages of the European Union and the Union of South American Nations . 
 
 
 
 This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. 
 
 
 Dutch (  &#160; Nederlands &#160; ( help · info ) ) is a West Germanic language and the native language of most of the population of the Netherlands , and about sixty percent of the populations of Belgium and Suriname , the three member states of the Dutch Language Union . Most speakers live in the European Union, where it is a first language for about 23 million and a second language for another 5 million people.  
 Dutch also holds official status in the Caribbean island nations of Aruba , Curaçao , and Sint Maarten , while Dutch or dialects assigned to it continue to be spoken, in parts of France and Germany , and to a lesser extent, in Indonesia ,  
 Dutch is closely related to German and English  
 
 
 
 Contents 
 
 
 1 Names 
 2 Classification 
 3 Geographic distribution 
 
 3.1 Europe 
 
 3.1.1 Netherlands 
 3.1.2 Belgium 
 
 3.1.2.1 Brussels 
 
 
 3.1.3 France 
 
 
 3.2 Asia 
 3.3 Oceania 
 3.4 Americas 
 
 3.4.1 Suriname 
 3.4.2 Caribbean 
 3.4.3 North America 
 
 
 3.5 Africa 
 
 3.5.1 Belgian Africa 
 3.5.2 Afrikaans 
 
 
 
 
 4 History 
 
 4.1 Development phases 
 
 
 5 Dialects 
 6 Phonology 
 
 6.1 Consonants 
 6.2 Vowels 
 6.3 Phonotactics 
 6.4 Polder Dutch 
 
 
 7 Grammar 
 
 7.1 Genders and cases 
 7.2 Word order 
 7.3 Diminutives 
 7.4 Compounds 
 
 
 8 Vocabulary 
 9 Writing system 
 10 Dutch as a foreign language 
 11 Popular misconceptions 
 
 11.1 The language of Flanders 
 11.2 Dutch as a German dialect 
 11.3 Low Dietsch 
 11.4 Relation to English 
 11.5 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 11.6 Dutch, not Deutsch 
 
 
 12 See also 
 13 Notes 
 14 References 
 15 Bibliography 
 16 External links 
 
 
 
 Names  
 Main article: Names for the Dutch language 
 While "Dutch" generally refers to the language as a whole, Belgian varieties are sometimes collectively referred to as " Flemish ". In both Belgium and the Netherlands, the native official name for Dutch is Nederlands , and its dialects have their own names, e.g. Hollands "Hollandish", West-Vlaams "Western Flemish", Limburgs "Limburgish", Brabants "Brabantian".  
 The language has been known under a variety of names. In Middle Dutch , dietsc (in the South) and diutsc , duutsc (in the North) were used to refer variably to Dutch, Low German, and German. This word is derived from diet "people" and was used to translate Latin (lingua) vulgaris "popular language" to set apart the Germanic vernacular from Latin (the language of writing and the Church ) and Romance .  An early form of this word appears Latinized in the Strasbourg Oaths (AD 842) as teudisca (lingua) to refer to the Rhenish Franconian portion of the oath and also underlies dialectal French thiois " Luxembourgish ", " Lorraine Franconian ". 
 During the Renaissance in the 16th century, duytsch (modern Duits ) "German" and nederduytsch "Low German" began to be differentiated from dietsch or nederlandsch "Dutch",  
 Nederlands , the official Dutch word for "Dutch", did not become firmly established until the 19th century. The repeated use of neder - or "low" to refer to the language is a reference to the Netherlands ' downriver location at the mouth of the Rhine (harking back to Latin nomenclature, e.g. Germania inferior vs. Germania superior ) and its position at the lowest dip of the Northern European plain .  
 Classification  
 
 Indo-European languages 
 
 Germanic 
 
 West Germanic 
 
 Low Franconian 
 
 Dutch 
 
 Afrikaans , Dutch-based creoles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dutch belongs to its own West Germanic sub-group, West Low Franconian , paired with its sister language Limburgish , or East Low Franconian, both of which stand out by mixing characteristics of Low German and High German.  Dutch is at one end of a dialect continuum known as the Rhenish fan where German gradually turns into Dutch. There was also at one time a dialect continuum that blurred the boundary between Dutch and Low German . In some small areas, there are still dialect continua, but they are gradually becoming extinct. 
 All three languages have shifted earlier /θ/ &gt; /d/ , show final-obstruent devoicing (Du broo d "bread"  ), and experienced lengthening of short vowels in stressed open syllables which has led to contrastive vowel length that is used as a morphological marker. Dutch stands out from Low German and High German in its retention of the clusters /sp/ and /st/ , while shifting of /sk/ to /sx/ . It also did not develop i-mutation as a morphological marker, although some eastern dialects did. In earlier periods, Low Franconian of either sort differed from Low German by maintaining a three-way plural verb conjugation ( Old Dutch - un , - it , - unt → Middle Dutch - en , - t , - en ). 
 In modern Dutch, the former 2nd-person plural (- t ) took the place of the 2nd-person singular, and the plural endings were reduced into a single form - en (cf. Du jij maakt "you(sg) make" vs. wij/jullie/zij maken "we/you(pl)/they make"). However, it is still possible to distinguish it from German (which has retained the three-way split) and Low German (which has - t in the present tense: wi/ji/se niemmet "we/you(pl)/they take"). Dutch and Low German show the collapsing of older ol / ul / al + dental into ol + dental, but in Dutch wherever /l/ was pre- consonantal and after a short vowel, it vocalized, e.g., Du goud "gold", zout "salt", woud "woods"&#160;: LG Gold , Solt , Woold &#160;: Germ Gold , Salz , Wald . 
 With Low German, Dutch shares: 
 
 The development of /xs/ &gt; /ss/ (Du vossen "foxes", ossen "oxen", LG Vösse , Ossen vs. Germ Füchse , Ochsen ) 
 /ft/ → /xt/ though it is far more common in Dutch (Du zacht "soft", LG sacht vs. Germ sanft , but Du lucht "air" vs. LG/Germ Luft ) 
 Generalizing the dative over the accusative case for certain pronouns (Du mij "me" (MDu di "you (sg.)"), LG mi / di vs. Germ mich / dich ) 
 Lack of the second consonant shift 
 Monophthongization of Germanic * ai &gt; ē and * au &gt; ō , e.g., Du steen "stone", oog "eye", LG Steen , Oog vs. G Stein , Auge , although this is not true of Limburgish (cf. sjtein , oug ). Exceptions include klein "small" and geit "goat" (but West Flemish kleene , geet ). 
 Loss of Germanic -z (which later became -r ) in monosyllabic words. For example, the German pronoun wir "we" corresponds to Du wij (but Limburgish veer ), LG wi . 
 
 Dutch shares with German: 
 
 The reflexive pronoun zich (Germ sich ). This was originally borrowed from Limburgian, which is why in most dialects ( Flemish , Brabantine ) the usual reflexive is hem / haar , just like in the rest of West Germanic. 
 Diphthongization of Germanic ē² &gt; ie &gt; i and ō &gt; uo &gt; u (Du hier "here", voet "foot", Germ hier , Fuß (from earlier fuoz ) vs. LG hier ) 
 Voicing of pre-vocalic initial voiceless alveolar fricatives , e.g., Du z even "seven", Germ sieben . 
 
 Geographic distribution  
 Dutch is an official language of the Netherlands , Belgium , Suriname , Aruba , Curaçao and Sint Maarten . Dutch is also an official language of several international organisations, such as the European Union and the Union of South American Nations .  It is used unofficially in the Caribbean Community . 
 Europe  
 Netherlands  
 Dutch is the official and foremost language of the Netherlands, a nation of 16.7 million people of whom 96 percent speak Dutch as their mother tongue.  and replaced by the language of the media, school, government (i.e., Standard Dutch ). 
 Immigrant languages are Indonesian , Turkish , English , Spanish , German , Berber , Moroccan Arabic , Papiamento , and Sranan . In the second generation these newcomers often speak Dutch as their mother tongue, sometimes alongside the language of their parents. 
 Belgium  
 
 
 
  
The language situation in Belgium. 
 
 
 Belgium , a nation of 11 million people, has three official languages, which are, in order from the largest speaker population to the smallest, Dutch (sometimes colloquially referred to as Flemish ), French , and German . An estimated 59% of all Belgians speak Dutch as their first language, while French is the mother tongue of 40%.  
 Dutch is the official language of the Flemish Region (where it is the mother tongue of about 97% of the population)  and one of the two official languages —along with French— of the Brussels Capital Region . Dutch is not official nor a recognised minority language in the Walloon Region , although on the border with the Flemish Region, there are four municipalities with language facilities for Dutch speakers. The most important Dutch dialects spoken in Belgium are West Flemish (also spoken in French Flanders ), East Flemish , Brabantian , and Limburgish , the latter having a dialect continuum in northeastern Wallonia and adjacent areas of Germany (as Low Dietsch ). 
 Brussels  
 
 
 
  
Home languages in Brussels Capital Territory (2006)  
 &#160; &#160;French only 
 &#160; &#160;French &amp; Dutch 
 &#160; &#160;French &amp; language other than Dutch 
 &#160; &#160;Dutch only 
 &#160; &#160;Neither French nor Dutch 
 
 
 
 Since the founding of the Kingdom of Belgium in 1830, Brussels has transformed from being almost entirely Dutch-speaking, with a small French minority, to being a multilingual city with French as the majority language and lingua franca . This language shift, the Frenchification of Brussels , is rooted in the 18th century but accelerated after Belgium became independent and Brussels expanded past its original boundaries.  
 Not only is French-speaking immigration responsible for the frenchification of Brussels, but more importantly the language change over several generations from Dutch to French was performed in Brussels by the Flemish people themselves. The main reason for this was the low social prestige of the Dutch language in Belgium at the time.  
 Only since the 1960s, after the fixation of the Belgian language border and the socio-economic development of Flanders was in full effect, could Dutch stem the tide of increasing French use.  
 Today an estimated 16 percent of city residents are native speakers of Dutch, while an additional 13 percent claim to have a "good to excellent" knowledge of Dutch.  
 France  
 
 
 
  
Language situation in the Dunkirk district of northern France in 1874 and then in 1972. 
 
 
 French Flemish , a variant of West Flemish , is spoken in the north-east of France by an estimated population of 20,000 daily speakers and 40,000 occasional speakers. It is spoken alongside French , which is gradually replacing it for all purposes and in all areas of communication.  
 In the 9th century the Germanic–Romance language border went from the mouth of the Canche to just north of the city of Lille , where it coincided with the present language border in Belgium .  
 Boulogne-sur-Mer was bilingual up to the 12th century, Calais up to the 16th century, and Saint-Omer until the 18th century. The western part of the County of Flanders , consisting of the castellanies of Bourbourg , Bergues , Cassel and Bailleul , became part of France between 1659 and 1678. However, the linguistic situation in this formerly monolingually Dutch-speaking region did not dramatically change until the French Revolution in 1789, and Dutch continued to fulfil the main functions of a cultural language throughout the 18th century.  
 During the 19th century, especially in the second half of it, Dutch was banned from all levels of education and lost most of its functions as a cultural language. The cities of Dunkirk , Gravelines and Bourbourg had become predominantly French-speaking by the end of the 19th century. In the countryside, until World War I, many elementary schools continued to teach in Dutch, and the Roman Catholic Church continued to preach and teach the cathechism in Flemish in many parishes.  
 Nonetheless, since French enjoyed a much higher status than Dutch, from about the interbellum onward everybody became bilingual, the generation born after World War II being raised exclusively in French. In the countryside, the passing on of Flemish stopped during the 1930s or 1940s. As a consequence, the vast majority of those still having an active command of Flemish belong to the generation of over the age of 60.  
 Asia  
 
 
 
  
An anachronous map of the Dutch colonial Empire. Light green: territories administered by or originating from territories administered by the Dutch East India Company ; dark green the Dutch West India Company . 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The growth of the Dutch East Indies .  
 
 
 Despite the Dutch presence in Indonesia for almost 350 years, the Dutch language has no official status there  
 Unlike other European nations, the Dutch chose not to follow a policy of language expansion amongst the indigenous peoples of their colonies.  
 Instead, use of local languages —or, where this proved to be impractical, of Malay — was encouraged. As a result, fewer than 2% of Indonesians could speak Dutch in 1940.  
 After independence, Dutch was dropped as an official language and replaced by Malay. Yet the Indonesian language inherited many words from Dutch: words for everyday life as well as scientific and technological terms.  many of which are transliterated to reflect phonetic pronunciation e.g. kantoor (Dutch for "office") in Indonesian is kantor , while bus ("bus") becomes bis . 
 In addition, many Indonesian words are calques on Dutch, for example, rumah sakit (Indonesian for "hospital") is calqued on the Dutch ziekenhuis (literally "sick house"), kebun binatang ("zoo") on dierentuin (literally "animal garden"), undang-undang dasar ("constitution") from grondwet (literally "basic law"). These account for some of the differences in vocabulary between Indonesian and Malay. 
 The first spelling system for Indonesian, devised by Charles van Ophuijsen  was influenced by Dutch, with the use of Dutch letter combinations such as oe . For example, tempo doeloe (meaning "the past") was pronounced as "dulu". In 1947, this was changed to u , hence tempo dulu . However, the letter combination oe continued to be used in people's names, e.g. the first two Presidents of Indonesia , Sukarno and Suharto , are often written as Soekarno and Soeharto . In 1972, following an agreement with Malaysia to harmonise the spelling of Indonesian and Malay, other Dutch-influenced letter combinations were replaced, e.g. tj and dj became c and j , respectively. For instance tjap ("brand" in Indonesian) became cap and Djakarta , the country's capital, became Jakarta . 
 Dutch-based creole languages spoken (now or formerly) in the Dutch East Indies include Javindo and Petjo , most of whose speakers were Indo or Eurasians . As a result of Indo emigration to the Netherlands following independence, the use of these languages declined. 
 The century and half of Dutch rule in Ceylon (now Sri Lanka ) and southern India left few traces of the Dutch language. A few words such as tapal , kokin and kakhuis are still used in some of the Indian languages. 
 Oceania  
 After the declaration of independence of Indonesia, Western New Guinea remained a Dutch colony until 1962, known as Netherlands New Guinea .  Despite prolonged Dutch presence, the Dutch language is not spoken by many Papuans, the colony having been ceded to Indonesia in 1963. 
 Immigrant communities can be found in Australia and New Zealand . The 2006 Australian census showed 36,179 people speaking Dutch at home.  
 Americas  
 
 
 
  
The location of Suriname in South America . 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The location of the Dutch Caribbean in the southern Caribbean . 
 
 
 In contrast to the colonies in the East Indies , from the second half of the 19th century onwards, the Netherlands envisaged expansion of Dutch in its colonies in the West Indies . Until 1863, when slavery was abolished in the West Indies, slaves were forbidden to speak Dutch. Most important were the efforts of Christianisation through Dutchification, which did not occur in Indonesia owing to a policy of non-involvement in the Islamised regions. Secondly, most of the people in the Colony of Surinam (now Suriname ) worked on Dutch plantations, which reinforced the importance of Dutch as a means for direct communication.  
 Suriname  
 In Suriname , where in the second half of the 19th century the Dutch authorities introduced a policy of assimilation ,  
 Caribbean  
 In Aruba , Curaçao and Sint Maarten , all parts of the Kingdom of the Netherlands , Dutch is the official language but spoken as a first language by only 7% to 8% of the population,  
 North America  
 In New Jersey in the United States , an almost extinct dialect of Dutch, Jersey Dutch , spoken by descendants of 17th-century Dutch settlers in Bergen and Passaic counties, was still spoken as late as 1921.  
 Martin Van Buren , the eighth President of the United States , spoke Dutch as his first language and is the only U.S. President to have spoken a language other than English as his first language. Dutch prevailed for many generations as the dominant language in parts of New York along the Hudson River . Another famous American born in this region who spoke Dutch as a first language was Sojourner Truth . 
 According to the 2000 United States census , 150,396 people spoke Dutch at home,  
 Africa  
 Belgian Africa  
 
 
 
  
The Belgian colonial empire . 
 
 
 Belgium , which had gained its independence from the Netherlands in 1830, also held a colonial empire from 1901 to 1962, consisting of the Belgian Congo and Ruanda-Urundi . Unlike Belgium itself, the colonies had no de jure official language.  
 After World War II, proposals of dividing the colony into a French-speaking and a Dutch-speaking part—after the example of Belgium—were discussed within the Flemish Movement .  
 When the call for a better recognition of Dutch in the colony got louder, the évolués ("developed Congolese")—among them Mobutu Sese Seko —argued that Dutch had no right over the indigenous languages, defending the privileged position of French.  
 The colonial authorities used Lingala , Kongo , Swahili and Tshiluba in communication with the local population and in education.  Of these, Congo is the most francophone country. Knowledge of Dutch in former Belgian Africa is virtually nonexistent. 
 Afrikaans  
 Main article: Afrikaans 
 
 
 
  
The distribution of Afrikaans across South Africa: proportion of the population speaking Afrikaans in the home.
 
 
 
 &#160; &#160;0–20% 
 &#160; &#160;20–40% 
 &#160; &#160;40–60% 
 
 
 
 &#160; &#160;60–80% 
 &#160; &#160;80–100% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The distribution of Afrikaans across South Africa: density of Afrikaans home-language speakers.
 
 
 
 &#160; &#160;&lt;1 /km² 
 &#160; &#160;1–3 /km² 
 &#160; &#160;3–10 /km² 
 &#160; &#160;10–30 /km² 
 &#160; &#160;30–100 /km² 
 
 
 
 &#160; &#160;100–300 /km² 
 &#160; &#160;300–1000 /km² 
 &#160; &#160;1000–3000 /km² 
 &#160; &#160;&gt;3000 /km² 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The largest legacy of the Dutch language lies in South Africa , which attracted large numbers of Dutch, Flemish and other northwest European farmer (in Dutch, boer ) settlers, all of whom were quickly assimilated.  
 European Dutch remained the literary language until the early 20th century, when under pressure of Afrikaner nationalism the local "African" Dutch was preferred over the written, European-based standard.  
 Both languages are still largely mutually intelligible , although this relation can in some fields (such as lexicon, spelling and grammar) be asymmetric, as it is easier for Dutch speakers to understand written Afrikaans than it is for Afrikaans speakers to understand written Dutch.  
 See also: Differences between Afrikaans and Dutch 
 It is the third language of South Africa in terms of native speakers (~13.5%),  
 History  
 Main article: History of Dutch 
 The history of the Dutch language begins around AD 450–500 after Old Frankish , one of the many West Germanic tribal languages, was split by the Second Germanic consonant shift . At more or less the same time the Ingvaeonic nasal spirant law led to the development of the direct ancestors of modern Dutch Low Saxon , Frisian and English. The northern dialects of Old Frankish generally did not participate in either of these two shifts, except for a small amount of phonetic changes, and are hence known as Old Low Franconian ; the "Low" refers to dialects not influenced by the consonant shift. 
 The most south-eastern dialects of the Franconian languages became part of High —though not Upper — German even though a dialect continuum remained. The fact that Dutch did not undergo the sound changes may be the reason why some people say that Dutch is like a bridge between English and German . Within Old Low Franconian there were two subgroups: Old East Low Franconian and Old West Low Franconian, which is better known as Old Dutch . 
 East Low Franconian was eventually absorbed by Dutch as it became the dominant form of Low Franconian, although it remains a noticeable substrate within the southern Limburgish dialects of Dutch. As the two groups were so similar, it is often difficult to determine whether a text is Old Dutch or Old East Low Franconian; hence most linguists will generally use Old Dutch synonymously with Old Low Franconian and mostly do not differentiate. 
 Development phases  
 Dutch, like other Germanic languages, is conventionally divided into three development phases which were: 
 
 450(500)–1150 Old Dutch ( First attested in the Salic Law ) 
 
 
 1150–1500 Middle Dutch ( Also called " Diets " in popular use, though not by linguists ) 
 
 
 1500–present Modern Dutch ( Saw the creation of the Dutch standard language and includes contemporary Dutch ) 
 
 The transition between these languages was very gradual and one of the few moments linguists can detect somewhat of a revolution is when the Dutch standard language emerged and quickly established itself. Standard Dutch is very similar to most Dutch dialects. 
 The development of the Dutch language is illustrated by the following sentence in Old, Middle and Modern Dutch: 
 
 " Irlôsin sol an frithe sêla mîna fan thên thia ginâcont mi, wanda under managon he was mit mi " ( Old Dutch ) 
 " Erlossen sal  in vrede siele mine van dien die genaken mi, want onder menegen hi was met mi " ( Middle Dutch ) 
 
 (Using same word order ) 
 
 " Verlossen zal hij in vrede ziel mijn van degenen die  na komen mij, want onder menigen hij was met mij " ( Modern Dutch ) 
 
 (Using correct contemporary Dutch word order) 
 
 " Hij zal mijn ziel in vrede verlossen van degenen die mij te na komen, want onder menigen was hij met mij " ( Modern Dutch ) (see Psalm 55:19 ) 
 " He shall my soul in peace free from those who me too near come, because amongst many was he with me " ( English literal translation in the same word order ) 
 " He will deliver my soul in peace from those who attack me, because, amongst many, he was with me " ( English translation in unmarked word order ) (see Psalm 55:18 ) 
 
 A process of standardisation started in the Middle Ages , especially under the influence of the Burgundian Ducal Court in Dijon ( Brussels after 1477). The dialects of Flanders and Brabant were the most influential around this time. The process of standardisation became much stronger at the start of the 16th century, mainly based on the urban dialect of Antwerp . In 1585 Antwerp fell to the Spanish army: many fled to the Northern Netherlands, especially the province of Holland, where they influenced the urban dialects of that province. In 1637, a further important step was made towards a unified language, when the Statenvertaling , the first major Bible translation into Dutch, was created that people from all over the United Provinces could understand. It used elements from various, even Dutch Low Saxon , dialects but was predominantly based on the urban dialects of Holland . 
 Dialects  
 Main article: Dutch dialects 
 
 
 
 This section is empty. You can help by adding to it . (November 2013) 
 
 
 Phonology  
 Main article: Dutch phonology 
 
 
  
 This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. 
 
 
 This section gives only a general overview of the phonemes of Dutch. For further details on different realisations of phonemes, dialectal differences and example words, see the full article at Dutch phonology . 
 Consonants  
 Like most Germanic languages, the Dutch consonant system did not undergo the High German consonant shift and has a syllable structure that allows fairly complex consonant clusters . Dutch also retains full use of the velar fricatives that were present in Proto-Germanic , but lost or modified in many other Germanic languages. 
 Dutch has final-obstruent devoicing : at the end of a word, voicing distinction is neutralised and all obstruents are pronounced voiceless. For example, goede ("good") is /ˈɣudə/ but the related form goed is /ɣut/ . 
 
 
 &#160; 
 Bilabial 
 Labio- 
dental 
 Alveolar 
 Post- 
alveolar 
 Velar / 
 Uvular 
 Glottal 
 
 
 Nasal 
 m 
 
 n 
 
 ŋ 
 
 
 
 Plosive 
 p b 
 
 t d 
 
 k ɡ 
 (ʔ) 
 
 
 Fricative 
 
 f v 
 s z 
 ʃ ʒ 
 x ɣ 
 ɦ 
 
 
 Trill 
 
 
 r 
 
 
 
 Approximant 
 ʋ 
 l 
 
 j 
 
 
 
 Notes: 
 
  is not a separate phoneme in Dutch, but is inserted before vowel-initial syllables within words after /a/ and /ə/ and often also at the beginning of a word. 
 The realization of /r/ phoneme varies considerably from dialect to dialect and even between speakers in the same dialect area. Common realisations are an alveolar trill  . 
 The realization of /ʋ/ also varies somewhat by area and speaker. The main realisation is a labiodental approximant  . 
 The lateral /l/ is slightly velarized postvocalically in most dialects, particularly in the north.  
 /x/ and /ɣ/ may be true velars  . The more palatal realisations are common in southern areas, while uvulars are common in the north. 
 Some northern dialects have a tendency to devoice all fricatives regardless of environment. This is particularly common with /ɣ/ but can affect others as well. 
 /ʃ/ and /ʒ/ are not native phonemes of Dutch, and usually occur in borrowed words, like show and bagage ('baggage'). 
 /ɡ/ is not a native phoneme of Dutch and only occurs in borrowed words, like goal . 
 
 Vowels  
 Dutch has an extensive vowel inventory, as is common for Germanic languages. Vowels can be grouped as back rounded, front unrounded and front rounded. They are also traditionally distinguished by length or tenseness . 
 Vowel length is not always considered a distinctive feature in Dutch phonology, because it normally co-occurs with changes in vowel quality. One feature or the other may be considered redundant, and some phonemic analyses prefer to treat it as an opposition of tenseness . However, even if not considered part of the phonemic opposition, the long/tense vowels are still realised as phonetically longer than their short counterparts. The changes in vowel quality are also not always the same in all dialects, and in some there may be little difference at all, with length remaining the primary distinguishing feature. And while it is true that older words always pair vowel length with a change in vowel quality, new loanwords have reintroduced phonemic oppositions of length. Compare zonne(n)  ("cruise"). 
 
 
 
 
 Short/lax vowels 
 
 
 Front 
 unr. 
 Front 
 rnd. 
 Central 
 Back 
 
 
 Close 
 ɪ 
 ʏ 
 
 
 
 
 Mid 
 ɛ 
 
 ə 
 ɔ 
 
 
 Open 
 
 ɑ 
 
 
 
 
 
 Long/tense vowels 
 
 
 Front 
unr. 
 Front 
rnd. 
 Back 
 
 
 Close 
 i ~ iː 
 y ~ yː 
 u ~ uː 
 
 
 Close-mid 
 eː 
 øː 
 oː 
 
 
 Open-mid 
 ( ɛː ) 
 ( œː ) 
 ( ɔː ) 
 
 
 Open 
 aː 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Notes: 
 
 The distinction between /i y u/ and /iː yː uː/ is only slight, and may be considered allophonic for most purposes. However, some recent loanwords have introduced distinctively long /iː yː uː/ , making the length distinction marginally phonemic. 
 The long close-mid vowels /eː øː oː/ are realised as slightly closing diphthongs / in many northern dialects. 
 The long open-mid vowels /ɛː œː ɔː/ only occur in a handful of loanwords, mostly from French. 
 The long close and close-mid vowels are often pronounced more closed or as centering diphthongs before an /r/ in the syllable coda. This may occur before coda /l/ as well. 
 
 Dutch also has several diphthongs. All of them end in a close vowel ( /i y u/ ), but may begin with a variety of other vowels. They are grouped here by their first element. 
 
 
 
 
 Short/lax diphthongs 
 
 
 Front 
 unr. 
 Front 
 rnd. 
 Back 
 
 
 Close 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mid 
 ɛi 
 œy 
 ( ɔi ) 
 
 
 Open 
 
 
 ɑu ( ɑi ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Long/tense diphthongs 
 
 
 Front 
unr. 
 Front 
rnd. 
 Back 
 
 
 Close 
 iu 
 yu 
 ui 
 
 
 Mid 
 eːu 
 
 oːi 
 
 
 Open 
 aːi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Notes: 
 
 /ɛi œy ɑu/ are the most common diphthongs and commonly the only ones considered "true" phonemes in Dutch. /ɑi/ and /ɔi/ are rare and occur only in some words. The "long/tense" diphthongs, while they are indeed realised as proper diphthongs, are generally analysed phonemically as a long/tense vowel followed by a glide /j/ or /ʋ/ . 
 
 Phonotactics  
 The syllable structure of Dutch is (C)(C)(C)V(C)(C)(C)(C). Many words, as in English, begin with three consonants; for example, straat /straːt/ (street) . There are words that end in four consonants, e.g., herfst /ɦɛrfst/ 'autumn', ergst /ɛrxst/ 'worst', interessantst 'most interesting', sterkst /stɛrkst/ 'strongest', the last three of which are superlative adjectives. 
 The highest number of consonants in a single cluster is found in the word sle chtstschr ijvend /ˈslɛxtstˌsxrɛi̯vənt/ 'writing worst' with 7 consonant phonemes. Similar is angstschreeuw  &#160; /ˈɑŋstsxreːu̯/ &#160; ( help · info ) "scream in fear", with six in a row. It has to be noted though that the pronunciation of a word can differ greatly from its written form. In slechtstschrijvend the cluster is usually reduced because of assimilation /sts/ &gt;  . 
 Polder Dutch  
 A notable deviation from the official pronunciation  respectively, which makes this change an instance of a chain shift . 
 This change is interesting from a sociolinguistic point of view because it has apparently happened relatively recently, in the 1970s, and was pioneered by older well-educated women from the upper middle classes.  The lowering of the diphthongs has long been current in many Dutch dialects, and is comparable to the English Great Vowel Shift , and the diphthongisation of long high vowels in Modern High German , which centuries earlier reached the state now found in Polder Dutch. Stroop theorizes that the lowering of open-mid to open diphthongs is a phonetically "natural" and inevitable development and that Dutch, after having diphthongised the long high vowels like German and English, "should" have lowered the diphthongs like German and English as well. 
 Instead, he argues, this development has been artificially frozen in an "intermediate" state by the standardisation of Dutch pronunciation in the 16th century, where lowered diphthongs found in rural dialects were perceived as ugly by the educated classes and accordingly declared substandard. Now, however, in his opinion, the newly affluent and independent women can afford to let that natural development take place in their speech. Stroop compares the role of Polder Dutch with the urban variety of British English pronunciation called Estuary English . 
 Among Belgian Dutch speakers, this vowel shift is not taking place, as the diphthongs /ɛi/ , /ɔu/ and /œy/ are often pronounced as the monophthongs  . Speakers using such pronunciations have no phonemic diphthongs in their inventory. 
 Grammar  
 Main article: Dutch grammar 
 See also: DT-Manie 
 Dutch is grammatically similar to German , such as in syntax and verb morphology (for a comparison of verb morphology in English, Dutch and German, see Germanic weak verb and Germanic strong verb ). Dutch has grammatical cases , but these are now mostly limited to pronouns and a large number of set phrases . Inflected forms of the articles are also often found in surnames and toponyms. 
 Originally , Dutch had three genders: masculine, feminine and neuter, although for many speakers, masculine and feminine have merged to form the common gender (de), while the neuter (het) remains distinct as before. This gender system is similar to those of most Continental Scandinavian languages . Many Belgian speakers still make a clear distinction between masculine and feminine words (see Gender in Dutch ). As in English , but to a lesser degree, the inflectional grammar of the language (e.g., adjective and noun endings) has simplified over time. 
 Genders and cases  
 The table of definite articles below demonstrates that contemporary Dutch is less complex than German. The article has just two forms, de and het , more complex than English, which has only "the". The use of the older inflected form den in the dative or accusative as well as use of 'der' in the dative are restricted to numerous set phrases, surnames and toponyms. 
 
 
 
 Dutch 
 German 
 
 
 
 Masculine singular 
 Feminine singular 
 Neuter singular 
 Plural (any gender) 
 Masculine singular 
 Feminine singular 
 Neuter singular 
 Plural (any gender) 
 
 
 Nominative 
 de  
 de 
 het  
 de 
 der 
 die 
 das 
 die 
 
 
 Genitive 
 des / van de 
 der / van de 
 des / van het 
 der / van de 
 des 
 der 
 des 
 der 
 
 
 Dative 
 de 
 de 
 het 
 de 
 dem 
 der 
 dem 
 den 
 
 
 Accusative 
 de 
 de 
 het 
 de 
 den 
 die 
 das 
 die 
 
 
 In modern Dutch, the genitive articles 'des' and 'der' are only commonly used in idioms . Other usage is typically considered archaic or poetic. In most circumstances, the preposition 'van' is instead used, followed by the normal definitive article 'de' or 'het'. For the idiomatic use of the articles in the genitive, see for example: 
 
 Masculine singular: "des duivels" ( litt: of the devil ) (common proverbial meaning: Seething with rage) 
 Feminine singular: het woordenboek der Friese taal ( the dictionary of the Frisian language ) 
 Neuter singular: de vrouw des huizes ( the lady of the house ) 
 Plural: de voortgang der werken ( the progress of (public) works ) 
 
 In contemporary usage, the genitive case still occurs a little more often with plurals than with singulars, as the plural article is 'der' for all genders and no special noun inflection must be taken account of. 'Der' is commonly used in order to avoid reduplication of 'van', e.g. het merendeel der gedichten van de auteur instead of het merendeel van de gedichten van de auteur ("the bulk of the author's poems"). 
 There are also genitive forms for the pronoun die/dat ("that "), namely diens for masculine and neuter singulars and dier for feminine singular and all plurals. Although usually avoided in common speech, these forms can be used instead of possessive pronouns to avoid confusion. Compare: 
 
 Hij vertelde van zijn zoon en zijn vrouw . – He told about his son and his (own) wife. 
 Hij vertelde van zijn zoon en diens vrouw . – He told about his son and the latter's wife. 
 
 Analogically, the relative and interrogative pronoun wie ("who") has the genitive forms wiens and wier (corresponding to English "whose", but less frequent in use). 
 Dutch also has a range of fixed expressions that make use of the genitive articles, which can be abbreviated using apostrophes. Common examples include "'s ochtends" (with 's as abbreviation of des; in the morning ) and "desnoods" (lit: of the need , translated: if necessary ). 
 The Dutch written grammar has simplified over the past 100 years: cases are now mainly used for the pronouns, such as ik (I), mij, me (me), mijn (my), wie (who), wiens (whose: masculine or neuter singular), wier (whose: feminine singular, masculine or feminine plural). Nouns and adjectives are not case inflected (except for the genitive of proper nouns (names): -s, -'s or -'). In the spoken language cases and case inflections had already gradually disappeared from a much earlier date on (probably the 15th century) as in many continental West Germanic dialects. 
 Inflection of adjectives is more complicated. The adjective receives no ending with indefinite neuter nouns in singular (as with een /ən/ 'a/an'), and -e in all other cases. (This was also the case in Middle English, as in "a goode man".) Note that fiets belongs to the masculine/feminine category, and that water and huis are neuter. Water has no plural form. 
 
 
 
 Masculine singular or feminine singular 
 Neuter singular 
 Plural (any gender) 
 
 
 Definite 
(with definite article 
or pronoun) 
 de mooi e fiets (the beautiful bicycle) 
 het mooi e huis (the beautiful house) 
 de mooi e fietsen (the beautiful bicycles) 
de mooi e huizen (the beautiful houses) 
 
 
 Indefinite 
(with indefinite article or 
no article and no pronoun) 
 een mooi e fiets (a beautiful bicycle) 
koud e soep (cold soup) 
 een mooi huis (a beautiful house) 
koud water (cold water) 
 mooi e fietsen (beautiful bicycles) 
mooi e huizen (beautiful houses) 
 
 
 An adjective has no e if it is in the predicative : De soep is koud . 
 More complex inflection is still found in certain lexicalized expressions like de heer de s hui zes (literally, the man of the house), etc. These are usually remnants of cases (in this instance, the genitive case which is still used in German, cf. Der Herr des Hauses ) and other inflections no longer in general use today. In such lexicalized expressions remnants of strong and weak nouns can be found too, e.g. in het jaar des Her en (Anno Domini), where "-en" is actually the genitive ending of the weak noun. Also in this case, German retains this feature . 
 The developments of the Dutch and German case systems, however, are quite oppositional inasmuch as the genitive is the only case that is retained in modern Dutch—albeit to a limited degree—while the distinction between nominative, dative and accusative is lost completely (except in personal pronouns and fixed expressions). In German, on the contrary, the genitive is the only case that is widely avoided colloquially (and becoming less frequent in writing too) while the other three cases are distinguished throughout all registers of modern standard German. 
 Word order  
 Dutch exhibits subject–object–verb word order, but in main clauses the conjugated verb is moved into the second position in what is known as verb second or V2 word order . This makes Dutch word order almost identical to that of German, but often different from English, which has subject–verb–object word order and has since lost the V2 word order that existed in Old English .  
 An example sentence used in some Dutch language courses and textbooks is " Ik kan mijn pen niet vinden omdat het veel te donker is ", which translates into English word for word as " I can my pen not find because it far too dark is ", but in standard English word order would be written " I cannot find my pen because it is far too dark ". If the sentence is split into a main and subclause and the verbs highlighted, the logic behind the word order can be seen. 
 Main clause: " Ik kan mijn pen niet vinden " 
Verbs are placed in the final position, but the conjugated verb, in this case "kan" (can), is made the second element of the clause. 
 Subclause: " omdat het veel te donker is " 
The verb or verbs always go in the final position. 
 In an interrogative main clause the usual word order is: conjugated verb followed by subject; other verbs in final position: " Kun jij je pen niet vinden? " (literally " Can you your pen not find? ") " Can't you find your pen? " 
In the Dutch equivalent of a wh-question the word order is: interrogative pronoun (or expression) + conjugated verb + subject; other verbs in final position: " Waarom kun jij je pen niet vinden? " (" Why can you your pen not find? ") " Why can't you find your pen? "" 
In a tag question the word order is the same as in a declarative clause: " Jij kunt je pen niet vinden? " (" You can your pen not find? ") " You can't find your pen? "" 
A subordinate clause does not change its word order: " Kun jij je pen niet vinden omdat het veel te donker is? " (" Can you your pen not find because it far too dark is? ") " Can you not find your pen because it's too dark? "" 
 Diminutives  
 Dutch nouns can take endings for size: -je for singular diminutive and -jes for plural diminutive. Between these suffixes and the radical can come extra letters depending on the ending of the word: 
 
 boom (tree) – boom pje 
 ring (ring) – ring etje 
 koning (king) – konin kje 
 tien (ten) – tien tje (a ten euro note) 
 
 These diminutives are very common. As in German, all diminutives are neuter. In the case of words like "het meis je " (the girl), this is different from the natural gender. A diminutive ending can also be appended to an adverb or adjective (but not when followed by a noun). 
 
 klein (little, small) – een kleintje (a small one) 
 
 Compounds  
 Like most Germanic languages, Dutch forms noun compounds , where the first noun modifies the category given by the second ( hondenhok = doghouse). Unlike English, where newer compounds or combinations of longer nouns are often written in open form with separating spaces, Dutch (like the other Germanic languages) either uses the closed form without spaces ( boomhuis = tree house) or inserts a hyphen ( VVD-coryfee = outstanding member of the VVD, a political party). Like German, Dutch allows arbitrarily long compounds, but the longer they get, the less frequent they tend to be. 
 The longest serious entry in the Van Dale dictionary is  &#160; wapenstilstandsonderhandeling &#160; ( help · info ) (ceasefire negotiation). Leafing through the articles of association (Statuten) one may come across a 30-letter  &#160; vertegenwoordigingsbevoegdheid &#160; ( help · info ) (authorisation of representation). An even longer word cropping up in official documents is ziektekostenverzekeringsmaatschappij (health insurance company) though the shorter ziektekostenverzekeraar (health insurer) is more common. 
 Notwithstanding official spelling rules, some Dutch people nowadays tend to write the parts of a compound separately, a practice sometimes dubbed de Engelse ziekte (the English disease).  
 Vocabulary  
 Dutch vocabulary is predominantly Germanic in origin, considerably more so than English. This difference is mainly due to the heavy influence of Norman on English, and to Dutch patterns of word formation, such as the tendency to form long and sometimes very complicated compound nouns , being more similar to those of German and the Scandinavian languages. The Dutch vocabulary is one of the richest in the world and comprises at least 268,826 headwords .  
 Like English, Dutch includes words of Greek and Latin origin. French has also contributed a large number of words, most of which have entered into Dutch vocabulary via the Netherlands and not via Belgium, in spite of the cultural and economic dominance exerted by French speakers in Belgium until the first half of the 20th century. This happened because the status French enjoyed as the language of refinement and high culture inspired the affluent upper and upper-middle classes in the Netherlands to adopt many French terms into the language. 
 In Belgium no such phenomenon occurred, since members of the upper and upper-middle classes would have spoken French rather than Frenchify their Dutch. French terms heavily influenced Dutch dialects in Flanders, but Belgian speakers did (and do) tend to resist French loanwords when using standard Dutch. Nonetheless some French loanwords of relatively recent date have become accepted in standard Dutch, also in Belgium, albeit with a shift in meaning and not as straight synonyms for existing Dutch words. For example, "blesseren" (from French blesser , to injure) is almost exclusively used to refer to sports injuries, while in other contexts the standard Dutch verbs "kwetsen" and "verwonden" continue to be used. 
 Especially on the streets and in many professions, there is a steady increase of English loanwords, rather often pronounced or applied in a different way (see Dutch pseudo-anglicisms ). The influx of English words is maintained by the dominance of English in the mass media and on the Internet. 
 The most important dictionary of the modern Dutch language is the Van Dale groot woordenboek der Nederlandse taal ,  more commonly referred to as the Dikke van Dale ("dik" means "thick"). However, it is dwarfed by the 45,000-page Woordenboek der Nederlandsche Taal , a scholarly endeavour that took 147 years from initial idea to first edition. 
 Writing system  
 Main articles: Dutch alphabet , Dutch braille , and Dutch orthography 
 Dutch is written using the Latin script . Dutch uses one additional character beyond the standard alphabet, the digraph IJ . It has a relatively high proportion of doubled letters, both vowels and consonants, due to the formation of compound words and also to the spelling devices for distinguishing the many vowel sounds in the Dutch language. An example of five consecutive doubled letters is the word voorraaddoos (supply box). 
 The diaeresis (Dutch: trema ) is used to mark vowels that are pronounced separately. In the most recent spelling reform, a hyphen has replaced the diaeresis in compound words (i.e., if the vowels originate from separate words, not from prefixes or suffixes), e.g. zeeëend (seaduck) is now spelled zee-eend . 
 The acute accent occurs mainly in loanwords like café , but can also be used for emphasis or to differentiate between two forms. Its most common use is to differentiate between the indefinite article 'een' (a, an) and the numeral 'één' (one); also 'hé' (hey, also written 'hee'). 
 The grave accent is used to clarify pronunciation ('hè' , 'après-ski'). In the recent spelling reform, the accent grave was dropped as stress sign on short vowels in favour of the acute accent (e.g. 'wèl' was changed to 'wél'). 
 Other diacritical marks such as the circumflex only occur in a few words, most of them loanwords from French . The characters 'Ç', 'ç', 'Ñ' or 'ñ' can also be found in the Dutch language but the words which contain one of these characters are loanwords too and these words are inherited from Spain and Portugal. They don't occur very often. 
 The official spelling is set by the Wet schrijfwijze Nederlandsche taal (Law on the writing of the Dutch language; Belgium 1946, Netherlands 1947; based on a 1944 spelling revision; both amended in the 1990s after a 1995 spelling revision). The Woordenlijst Nederlandse taal , more commonly known as "het groene boekje" (i.e. "the green booklet", because of its colour), is usually accepted as an informal explanation of the law. However, the official 2005 spelling revision, which reversed some of the 1995 changes and made new ones, has been welcomed with a distinct lack of enthusiasm in both the Netherlands and Belgium. As a result, the Genootschap Onze Taal  (Our Language Society) decided to publish an alternative list, "het witte boekje" ("the white booklet"), which tries to simplify some complicated rules and offers several possible spellings for many contested words. This alternative orthography is followed by a number of major Dutch media organisations but mostly ignored in Belgium. 
 Dutch as a foreign language  
 As a foreign language , Dutch is mainly taught in primary and secondary schools in areas adjacent to the Netherlands and Flanders . In French-speaking Belgium , over 300,000 pupils are enrolled in Dutch courses, followed by over 20,000 in the German states of Lower Saxony and North Rhine-Westphalia , and over 7,000 in the French region of Nord-Pas de Calais (of which 4,550 are in primary school).  
 At an academic level, Dutch is taught in over 225 universities in more than 40 countries. About 10,000 students worldwide study Dutch at university.  Elsewhere in the world, the number of people learning Dutch is relatively small. 
 Popular misconceptions  
 The language of Flanders  
 Main article: Flemish (linguistics) 
 Dutch is the language of government, education, and daily life in Flanders , the northern part of Belgium . There is no officially recognized language called "Flemish", and both the Dutch and Belgian governments adhere to the standard Dutch ( Algemeen Nederlands ) defined by the Nederlandse Taalunie ("Dutch Language Union"). 
 The actual differences between the spoken standard language of Dutch and Belgian speakers are comparable to the differences between American and British English or the German spoken in Germany and Austria. In other words, most differences are rather a matter of accent than of grammar. Some of these differences are recognized by the Taalunie and major dictionaries as being interchangeably valid, although some dictionaries and grammars may mark them as being more prevalent in one region or the other. 
 The use of the word Vlaams ("Flemish") to describe Standard Dutch for the variations prevalent in Flanders and used there, is common in the Netherlands and Belgium. 
 Dutch as a German dialect  
 The question of what is a language, and what is a dialect, is rather a political and not a linguistic one. The dialect group from which Dutch is largely derived, Low Franconian , belongs to the whole of the continental West Germanic dialect set . This whole is sometimes imprecisely indicated by the word "German", but it might as well be called "Dutch". Indeed the Low Franconian dialects and languages are morphologically closer to the original form of Western Germanic than the High German from which standard German is derived. It is quite appropriate to call modern Dutch and High German sister languages, only they are derived not from one and the same common variety, but from cognate mother vernaculars of Continental West Germanic. 
 No intrinsic quality of the whole of the component dialects favours one standard over the other: both were rivals and historical contingency decided the range of their use. The state border does not reflect dialectal subdivisions. Only since the dialect continuum of continental West Germanic was broken by the 19th century introduction of mass education have the respective ranges been fixed; in the 18th century standard Dutch was still used as the normal written standard in the Lower Rhine , the county of Bentheim and East Frisia , now all part of Germany . See also Meuse-Rhenish . 
 Low Dietsch  
 Low Dietsch (Dutch: Platdiets, Limburgish: Platduutsj, French: Thiois or Platdutch) is a term mainly used within the Flemish terminology for the transitional Limburgish-Ripuarian dialects of a number of towns and villages in the north-east of the Belgian province of Liege, such as Gemmenich, Homburg, Montzen and Welkenraedt. 
 Relation to English  
 Dutch does have a relatively close genetic relationship to the descendants of Old and Middle English (such as English and Scots ), since both belong to the West Germanic languages and both lack most or all of the High German consonant shift that characterizes the descendants of Middle High German (such as German and Yiddish ). 
 The Frisian languages , however, are even more closely related to the Middle English descendants than Dutch. Languages and dialects sharing some features found in English and Frisian are referred to as Anglo-Frisian languages or, occasionally, Ingvaeonic languages. 
 Pennsylvania Dutch  
 Pennsylvania Dutch , a West Central German variety called Deitsch by its speakers, is not a form of Dutch. The word "Dutch" has historically been used for all speakers of continental West Germanic languages , including, the Dutch people , Flemish , Austrians , Germans , and the German-speaking Swiss . It is cognate with the Dutch archaism Diets , meaning "Dutch", and the German self-designation Deutsch . The use of the term "Dutch" exclusively for the language of Belgium, or for the inhabitants of the Netherlands or some of its former colonies, dates from the early 16th century. The name "Dutch" for the Pennsylvania dialect also stems from the way "Deutsch" is pronounced in the dialect itself. 
 Pennsylvania Dutch must not be confused with Jersey Dutch as spoken in Upstate New York in former ages, and even until the 1950s in New Jersey , being Dutch-based creole or pidgin languages. 
 Dutch, not Deutsch  
 The resemblance of the English-language word "Dutch" (referring to the language spoken in the Netherlands and Flanders ) and the German-language word Deutsch (meaning the language spoken in Germany , Austria , and much of Switzerland ) is not accidental, since both derive from the Germanic word þiudiskaz ("of the people, popular, vulgar, vernacular"; that is, as opposed to Latin). 
 Until roughly the 16th century, speakers of all the varieties of West Germanic from the mouth of the Rhine to the Alps had been accustomed to refer to their native speech as the vernacular . This was Dietsch or Duitsch in Middle Dutch and what would eventually stabilize as Deutsch further south. 
 English-speakers took the word Duitsch from their nearest Germanic-speaking neighbours in the Low Countries , and having anglicized it as Dutch ,  named after Germania . 
 See also  
 
 
 
 Dutch edition of Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 
 Afrikaans 
 
 Differences between Afrikaans and Dutch 
 
 
 Bargoens 
 Dutch braille 
 Dutch dialects 
 Dutch grammar 
 Dutch Language Union 
 Dutch linguistic influence on military terms 
 Dutch literature 
 Dutch name 
 Dutch orthography 
 Dutch-based creole languages 
 Flemish 
 French Flemish 
 Grand Dictation of the Dutch Language 
 Indo-European languages 
 Istvaeones 
 List of English words of Dutch origin 
 Low Dietsch 
 Low Franconian 
 Meuse-Rhenish 
 Middle Dutch 
 Old Dutch 
 Old Frankish 
 
 
 Notes  
 
 
 ^  In France, a historical dialect called French Flemish is spoken. There are about 80,000 Dutch speakers in France; see Simpson 2009 , p.&#160;307. In French Flanders, only a remnant of between 50,000 to 100,000 Flemish-speakers remain; see Berdichevsky 2004 , p.&#160;90. Flemish is spoken in the north-west of France by an estimated population of 20,000 daily speakers and 40,000 occasional speakers; see European Commission 2010 . 
A dialect continuum exists between Dutch and German through the South Guelderish and Limburgish dialects. 
In 1941, 400,000 Indonesians spoke Dutch, and Dutch exerted a major influence on Indonesian; see Sneddon 2003 , p.&#160;161. In 1941, about 0.5% of the inland population had a reasonable knowledge of Dutch; see Maier 2005 , p.&#160;12. At the beginning of World War II, about one million Asians had an active command of Dutch, while an additional half million had a passive knowledge; see Jones 2008 , p.&#160;xxxi. Many older Indonesians speak Dutch as a second language; see Thomson 2003 , p.&#160;80. Some of the ethnic Chinese in Indonesia speak Dutch amongst each other; see Tan 2008 , pp.&#160;62–64, Erdentuğ &amp; Colombijn 2002 , p.&#160;104. Dutch is spoken by "smaller groups of speakers" in Indonesia; see Bussmann 2002 , p.&#160;83. Some younger Indonesians learn Dutch as a foreign language because their parents and grandparents may speak it and because in some circles, Dutch is regarded as the language of the elite; see Vos 2001 , p.&#160;91. At present, only educated people of the oldest generation, in addition to specialists for which knowledge of the language is required, can speak Dutch fluently; see Ammon 2006 , p.&#160;2017. Around 25% of present-day Indonesian vocabulary can be traced back to Dutch words, see Maier 2005 , p.&#160;17. 
 ^  410,000 in USA, 159,000 in Canada, 47,000 in Australia; see Simpson 2009 , p.&#160;307. Between 200,000 and 400,000 in USA alone; see McGoldrick, Giordano &amp; Garcia-Preto 2005 , p.&#160;536. 
 ^  Afrikaans is a daughter language of Dutch; see Booij 1995 , p.&#160;2, Jansen, Schreuder &amp; Neijt 2007 , p.&#160;5, Mennen, Levelt &amp; Gerrits 2006 , p.&#160;1, Booij 2003 , p.&#160;4, Hiskens, Auer &amp; Kerswill 2005 , p.&#160;19, Heeringa &amp; de Wet 2007 , pp.&#160;1, 3, 5. 
Afrikaans was historically called Cape Dutch; see Deumert &amp; Vandenbussche 2003 , p.&#160;16, Conradie 2005 , p.&#160;208, Sebba 1997 , p.&#160;160, Langer &amp; Davies 2005 , p.&#160;144, Deumert 2002 , p.&#160;3, Berdichevsky 2004 , p.&#160;130. 
Afrikaans is rooted in 17th century dialects of Dutch; see Holm 1989 , p.&#160;338, Geerts &amp; Clyne 1992 , p.&#160;71, Mesthrie 1995 , p.&#160;214, Niesler, Louw &amp; Roux 2005 , p.&#160;459. 
Afrikaans is variously described as a creole, a partially creolised language, or a deviant variety of Dutch; see Sebba 2007 , p.&#160;116. 
 ^  It has the widest geographical and racial distribution of all official languages of South Africa; see Webb 2003 , pp.&#160;7, 8, Berdichevsky 2004 , p.&#160;131. It has by far the largest geographical distribution; see Alant 2004 , p.&#160;45. 
It is widely spoken and understood as a second or third language; see Deumert &amp; Vandenbussche 2003 , p.&#160;16, Kamwangamalu 2004 , p.&#160;207, Myers-Scotton 2006 , p.&#160;389, Simpson 2008 , p.&#160;324, Palmer 2001 , p.&#160;141, Webb 2002 , p.&#160;74, Herriman &amp; Burnaby 1996 , p.&#160;18, Page &amp; Sonnenburg 2003 , p.&#160;7, Brook Napier 2007 , pp.&#160;69, 71. 
An estimated 40&#160;percent of South Africans have at least a basic level of communication in Afrikaans; see Webb 2003 , p.&#160;7 McLean &amp; McCormick 1996 , p.&#160;333. Afrikaans is a lingua franca of Namibia; see Deumert 2004 , p.&#160;1, Adegbija 1994 , p.&#160;26, Batibo 2005 , p.&#160;79, Donaldson 1993 , p.&#160;xiii, Deumert &amp; Vandenbussche 2003 , p.&#160;16, Baker &amp; Prys Jones 1997 , p.&#160;364, Domínguez &amp; López 1995 , p.&#160;399, Page &amp; Sonnenburg 2003 , p.&#160;8, CIA 2010 . 
While the number of total speakers of Afrikaans is unknown, estimates range between 15 and 23 million. Afrikaans has 16.3 million speakers; see de Swaan 2001 , p.&#160;216. Afrikaans has a total of 16 million speakers; see Machan 2009 , p.&#160;174. About 9 million people speak Afrikaans as a second or third language; see Alant 2004 , p.&#160;45, Proost 2006 , p.&#160;402. Afrikaans has over 5 million native speakers and 15 million second language speakers; see Réguer 2004 , p.&#160;20. Afrikaans has about 6 million native and 16 million second language speakers; see Domínguez &amp; López 1995 , p.&#160;340. In South Africa, over 23 million people speak Afrikaans, of which a third are first-language speakers; see Page &amp; Sonnenburg 2003 , p.&#160;7. L2 "Black Afrikaans" is spoken, with different degrees of fluency, by an estimated 15 million; see Stell 2008–11 , p.&#160;1. 
Dutch and Afrikaans share mutual intelligibility; see Gooskens 2007 , p.&#160;453, Holm 1989 , p.&#160;338, Baker &amp; Prys Jones 1997 , p.&#160;302, Egil Breivik &amp; Håkon Jahr 1987 , p.&#160;232. For written mutual intelligibility; see Sebba 2007 , p.&#160;116, Sebba 1997 , p.&#160;161. 
It is easier for Dutch speakers to understand Afrikaans than the other way around; see Gooskens 2007 , p.&#160;454. 
 ^  Dutch and English are the closest relatives of German; see Abraham 2006 , p.&#160;124. Dutch is the closest relative of German; see Czepluch &amp; Abraham 2004 , p.&#160;13. Dutch and English are closely related; see Ingram 1989 , p.&#160;494, Todd 2004 , p.&#160;37, Kager 1989 , p.&#160;105, Hogg 2002 , p.&#160;134, De Bot, Lowie &amp; Verspoor 2005 , pp.&#160;130, 166, Weissenborn &amp; Höhle 2001 , p.&#160;209, Crisma &amp; Longobarde 2009 , p.&#160;250. Dutch and English are very closely related languages; see Fitzpatrick 2007 , p.&#160;188. Dutch is, after Frisian, the closest relative of English; see Mallory &amp; Adams 2006 , p.&#160;23, Classe 2000 , p.&#160;390, Hogg 2002 , p.&#160;3, Denning, Kessler &amp; Leben 2007 , p.&#160;22. English is most closely related to Dutch; see Lightfoot 1999 , p.&#160;22, and more so than to German; see Sonnenschein 2008 , p.&#160;100, Kennedy Wyld 2009 , p.&#160;190. 
 ^  Dutch is traditionally described as morphologically between English and German, while syntactically closer to German; see Clyne 2003 , p.&#160;133. Dutch has been positioned to be between English and German; see Putnam 2011 , p.&#160;108, Bussmann 2002 , p.&#160;83, Müller 1995 , p.&#160;121, Onysko &amp; Michel 2010 , p.&#160;210. Typologically, Dutch takes a midway position between English and German, having a similar word order to that of German, having a grammatical gender, and a largely Germanic vocabulary. It is however morphologically close to English, and the case system and subjunctive have largely fallen out of use; see Swan &amp; Smith 2001 , p.&#160;6. 
 ^  Dutch shares with English its simplified morphology and the abandonment of the grammatical case system ; see Booij 1995 , p.&#160;1, Simpson 2009 , p.&#160;309. In contrast to German, case markings have become vestigial in English and Dutch; see Hogg 2002 , p.&#160;134, Abraham 2006 , p.&#160;118, Bussmann 2002 , p.&#160;83, Swan &amp; Smith 2001 , p.&#160;6. The umlaut in Dutch and English matured to a much lesser extent than in German; see Simpson 2009 , p.&#160;307, Lass 1994 , p.&#160;70, Deprez 1997 , p.&#160;251. 
 ^  Dutch has effectively two genders; see Booij 1995 , p.&#160;1, Simpson 2009 , p.&#160;309, De Vogelaer 2009 , p.&#160;71. Grammatical gender has little grammatical consequences in Dutch; see Bussmann 2002 , p.&#160;84 
 ^  Simpson 2009 , p.&#160;307, Booij 1995 , p.&#160;1. Dutch and German not have a strict SVO order as in English; see Hogg 2002 , pp.&#160;87, 134. In contrast to English, which has SVO as the underlying word order, for Dutch and German this is SV 1 OV 2 or (in subordinate clauses) SOV; see Ingram 1989 , p.&#160;495, Jordens &amp; Lalleman 1988 , pp.&#160;149, 150, 177. Dutch has almost the same word order as German; see Swan &amp; Smith 2001 , p.&#160;6. 
 ^  Dutch vocabulary has more Germanic words than English and more Romance words than German; see Simpson 2009 , p.&#160;309, Swan &amp; Smith 2001 , p.&#160;17. Dutch vocabulary is mostly Germanic; see Swan &amp; Smith 2001 , p.&#160;6. Dutch has the most similar vocabulary to English; see Mallory &amp; Adams 2006 , p.&#160;1. 
 
 
 References  
 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d  (Dutch) "Nederlands, wereldtaal" . Nederlandse Taalunie. 2010 . Retrieved 2011-04-07 . &#160; 
 ^  a   b   c   European Commission (2006). "Special Eurobarometer 243: Europeans and their Languages (Survey)" (PDF). Europa . Retrieved 2007-02-03 . &#160; "1% of the EU population claims to speak Dutch well enough in order to have a conversation." (page 153) 
 ^  http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/1498651/Netherlandic-language 
 ^  Especially maintained in written language; cf. W. Haeseryn et al. (eds.), Algemene Nederlandse Spraakkunst (2nd ed., 1997), 160–161. 
 ^  Britannica on Netherlandic Language ; see also C.B. van Haeringen, Netherlandic language research. Men and works in the study of Dutch , 2nd edition, Leiden: Brill 1960. 
 ^  Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary , 2nd revised edn., s.v. "Dutch" (Random House Reference, 2005). 
 ^  "Dutch", in Encyclopedia of the Languages of Europe , ed. Glanville Price (Oxford: Blackwell, 1998), 129. 
 ^  Until World War II , Nederlands rivaled Diets as the language's designation. However the similarity to Deutsch resulted in its disuse when the German occupiers and Dutch fascists appropriated and made extensive use of Diets to stress the Dutch as an ancient Germanic people. 
 ^  Price, Encyc. Langs. of Europe , 129. 
 ^  Georges De Schutter, "Dutch", The Germanic Languages , eds. Ekkehard König and Johan van der Auwera (London: Routledge, 1994), 439. 
 ^  (Dutch) See J. Verdam, Middelnederlandsch handwoordenboek (The Hague 1932 (reprinted 1994)): "Nederlant, znw. o. I) Laag of aan zee gelegen land. 2) het land aan den Nederrijn; Nedersaksen, -duitschland." 
 ^  (Dutch) Source on the Low Countries. ( De Nederlanden ) 
 ^  (Dutch) neder- corresponds with the English nether- , which means "low" or "down". See Online etymological dictionary. Entry: Nether. 
 ^  Friedrich Maurer uses the term Istvaeonic instead of Franconian; see Friedrich Maurer (1942), Nordgermanen und Alemannen: Studien zur germanischen und frühdeutschen Sprachgeschichte, Stammes- und Volkskunde , Bern: Verlag Francke. 
 ^  Constitutive Treaty of the Union of South American Nations  , Ministério das Relações Exteriores, Brazil 
 ^  a   b   c  Hoe trots zijn wij op het Nederlands? , Nederlandse Taalunie, 2005 
 ^  Footnote: Native speakers of Dutch living in Wallonia and of French in Flanders are relatively small minorities that furthermore largely balance one another, hence counting all inhabitants of each unilingual area to the area's language can cause only insignificant inaccuracies (99% can speak the language). Dutch: Flanders' 6.079 million inhabitants and about 15% of Brussels' 1.019 million are 6.23 million or 59.3% of the 10.511 million inhabitants of Belgium (2006); German: 70,400 in the German-speaking community (which has language facilities for its less than 5% French-speakers), and an estimated 20,000–25,000 speakers of German in the Walloon Region outside the geographical boundaries of their official community, or 0.9%; French: in the latter area as well as mainly in the rest of Wallonia (3.414 − 0.093 = 3.321 million) and 85% of the Brussels inhabitants (0.866 million) thus 4.187 million or 39.8%; together indeed 100%. 
 ^  a   b  (Dutch) "Taalgebruik in Brussel en de plaats van het Nederlands. Enkele recente bevindingen"  , Rudi Janssens, Brussels Studies, Nummer 13, 7 January 2008 (see page 4). 
 ^  "Wallonie – Bruxelles, Le Service de la langue française" (in French). 1997-05-19. &#160;  
 ^  "Villes, identités et médias francophones: regards croisés Belgique, Suisse, Canada" (in French). University of Laval , Québec . &#160;  
 ^  G. Geerts. "Nederlands in België, Het Nederlands bedreigd en overlevend" . Geschiedenis van de Nederlandse taal (in Dutch). M.C. van den Toorn, W. Pijnenburg, J.A. van Leuvensteijn and J.M. van der Horst. &#160; 
 ^  (Dutch) "Thuis in gescheiden werelden" — De migratoire en sociale aspecten van verfransing te Brussel in het midden van de 19e eeuw" , BTNG-RBHC, XXI, 1990, 3–4, pp. 383–412, Machteld de Metsenaere, Eerst aanwezend assistent en docent Vrije Universiteit Brussel 
 ^  J. Fleerackers, Chief of staff of the Belgian Minister for Dutch culture and Flemish affairs (1973). "De historische kracht van de Vlaamse beweging in België: de doelstellingen van gister, de verwezenlijkingen vandaag en de culturele aspiraties voor morgen" . Digitale bibliotheek voor Nederlandse Letteren (in Dutch). &#160; 
 ^  "Brussels" . Encyclopædia Britannica . &#160; 
 ^  "Bruxelles dans l'oeil du cyclone" (in French). France 2 . 2007-11-14. &#160; 
 ^  a   b  Flemish in France . The Euromosaic study by the European Commission. 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   Dutch/Flemish in the north of France , by Hugo Ryckeboer. University of Ghent . &#160;PDF 
 ^  SarDesai (1997), p.88. 
 ^  Baker (1998), p.202. 
 ^  Ammon (2005), p.2017. 
 ^  Booij (1995), p.2 
 ^  a   b  (Dutch) Indonesië  , Nederlandse Taalunie, 2008 
 ^  a   b   c   d  (Dutch) Hoeveel studenten studeren er jaarlijks Nederlands aan universiteiten buiten het taalgebied? , Nederlandse Taalunie, 2008 
 ^  Joel Corneal Kuipers (1998). Language, identity, and marginality in Indonesia: the changing nature of ritual speech on the Island of Sumba . Cambridge University Press. p.&#160;9 . Retrieved 2010-06-29 . &#160; 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i  (Dutch) Westerse koloniale taalpolitiek in Azië , Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen, 1998 
 ^  Sneddon (2003), p.162. 
 ^  a   b  A Hidden Language – Dutch in Indonesia , Hendrik M, Maier, University of California 
 ^  " Indonesia: Fight over the Papuans ". Time. December 29, 1961. 
 ^  Language Spoken at Home by sex for Australia (Excel spreadsheet) , Australian 2006 census. 
 ^  "2006 Census Data - QuickStats About Culture and Identity - Tables" . Statistics New Zealand . Retrieved 14 August 2011 . &#160;  
 ^  (Dutch) Toelichting bij de overeenkomsttekst  , Nederlandse Taalunie 
 ^  "CIA – The World Factbook – Suriname" . Cia.gov . Retrieved 2012-08-19 . &#160; 
 ^  Source: Zevende algemene volks- en woningtelling 2004, Algemeen Bureau voor de Statistiek 
 ^  (Dutch) Nederlandse Taalunie 
 ^  "Ethnologue on Sranan" . Ethnologue.com . Retrieved 2012-08-19 . &#160; 
 ^  Recognition of Surinamese-Dutch ( Surinaams-Nederlands ) as an equal natiolect was expressed in 1976 by the publication of the Woordenboek van het Surinaams-Nederlands – een geannoteerde lijst van Surinaams-Nederlandse woorden en uitdrukkingen ( Dictionary of Surinam Dutch – an annotated list of Surinam-Dutch words and expressions ), see Johannes van Donselaar Woordenboek van het Surinaams-Nederlands – een geannoteerde lijst van Surinaams-Nederlandse woorden en uitdrukkingen , Utrecht&#160;: Instituut A. W. de Groot voor Algemene Taalwetenschap van de Rijksuniversiteit te Utrecht (1976), Amsterdam, E.T.Rap (1977) ISBN 90-6005-125-4 , published in 1989 as the Woordenboek van het Surinaams-Nederlands ( Dictionary of Surinam Dutch ), by Van Donselaar, and later by the publication of the Woordenboek Surinaams Nederlands ( Dictionary Surinam Dutch ) in 2009 (editor Renata de Bies, in cooperation with lexicologists Willy Martin en Willy Smedts), which was previously published as the Woordenboek van de Surinaamse Bijdrage aan het Nederlands ( Dictionary of the Surinam Contribution to Dutch" ). 
 ^  "CIA – The World Factbook – Aruba" . Cia.gov . Retrieved 2012-08-19 . &#160; 
 ^  Languages of Aruba  
 ^  "Jersey Dutch" . Bartleby.com . Retrieved 2012-08-19 . &#160; 
 ^  "German Myth 7 - Pennsylvania Dutch or German?" . German.about.com. 2012-04-10 . Retrieved 2012-08-19 . &#160; 
 ^  US Census 2000 Frisian, Afrikaans, and Pennsylvania Dutch exluded. 
 ^  "Statistics Canada 2006 (Dutch and Flemish grouped together)" . 2.statcan.ca. 2011-07-04 . Retrieved 2012-08-19 . &#160; 
 ^  "Agriculture-population linkage data for the 2006 Census. The Daily" . Statcan.gc.ca. 2008-12-02 . Retrieved 2012-08-19 . &#160; 
 ^  Statistics Canada, 2006 Census Profile of Federal Electoral Districts (2003 Representation Order): Language, Mobility and Migration and Immigration and Citizenship. Ottawa, 2007, pp. 6–10. 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e  (Dutch) Vlamingen en Afrikanen — Vlamingen in Centraal Afrika , Faculteit Sociale Wetenschappen, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven , Belgium 
 ^  (French) La langue de la Justice et les Constitutions africaines , by Nazam Halaoui. Editions juridiques associées n°51–52 2002/2-3. Cairn 2007 
 ^  a   b   c  (French) République démocratique du Congo , Laval University , Canada 
 ^  (French) La situation linguistique, les langues en contact et le français dans les anciennes colonies belges en Afrique (Burundi, Rwanda, RD Congo) . Réseau de chercheurs — Sociolinguistique et dynamique des langues. Agence universitaire de la Francophonie. 
 ^  (Dutch) Congo made in Flanders? Koloniale Vlaamse visies op ‘blank’ en ‘zwart’ in Belgisch Congo , by B. Ceuppens. Academia Press. Ghent, 2003. 
 ^  a   b   c  School en cultuur: eenheid en verscheidenheid in de geschiedenis van het Belgische en Nederlandse onderwijs (page 18) , by Nelleke Bakker and Marjoke Rietveld-van Wingerden. Published by Uitgeverij Van Gorcum, 2006 
 ^  a   b  (French) ndimurukundo.pdf Problématique de la législation linguistique au Burundi  , Université du Burundi 
 ^  a   b   c   "Language Standardization and Language Change: The Dynamics of Cape Dutch" . Ana Deumert (John Benjamins Publishing Company). 2004 . Retrieved 2008-11-10 . &#160; 
 ^  South Africa: Legislation: 1910–2008 , Archontology.org 
 ^  Transformation in the Judiciary — A constitutional imperative.  Supreme Court of Appeal, Government of South Africa. 
 ^  "Language and Social History: Studies in South African Sociolinguistics (page 214)" . Rajend Mesthrie (New Africa Books). 1995 . Retrieved 2008-11-03 . &#160; 
 ^  "The Dutch Language: A Survey (page 132)" . Pierre Brachin, Paul Vincent (Brill Archive). 1985 . Retrieved 2008-11-03 . &#160; 
 ^  "Oxford Journal on Mutual Comprehensibility of Written Afrikaans and Dutch" . Llc.oxfordjournals.org. 2006-08-27 . Retrieved 2012-08-19 . &#160; 
 ^  Name (Required): (2012-08-14). "Retrieved 12 April 2010" . Kwintessential.co.uk . Retrieved 2012-08-19 . &#160; 
 ^  a   b  Key results of the 2011 census , Statistics South Africa 
 ^  Primary tables: 1996 and 2001 compared , Statistics South Africa 
 ^  Language policy development in South Africa  , by V.N. Webb, Centre for Research in the Politics of Language, University of Pretoria 
 ^  "The World Factbook (CIA) — Namibia" . Cia.gov . Retrieved 2012-08-19 . &#160; 
 ^  "Language Attitudes in Sub-Saharan Africa: A Sociolinguistic Overview (page 26)" . Efurosibina E. Adegbija (Multilingual Matters). 1994 . Retrieved 2008-11-10 . &#160; 
 ^  Languages Spoken in Namibia  , Namibian Government 
 ^  "Ethnologue on Afrikaans" . Ethnologue.com . Retrieved 2012-08-19 . &#160; 
 ^  Verhoeven (2005 :245) 
 ^  Stroop, Jan (October 1999). "Young Women's Farewell to Standard Dutch" . Poldernederlands . Retrieved 2 January 2010 . &#160; 
 ^  "History of the Dutch Language: Language change in the 19th and 20th century" . Neon.niederlandistik.fu-berlin.de . Retrieved 2012-08-19 . &#160; 
 ^  "Verb Movement in Old and Middle English: Dialect Variation and Language Contact" . Ling.upenn.edu. 1995-01-20 . Retrieved 2012-08-19 . &#160; 
 ^  SOS! – In het Nederlands moeten samengestelde woorden gewoon aan elkaar geschreven worden (Dutch) 
 ^  Engelse ziekte – Dutch language Wikipedia (Dutch) 
 ^  Van Dale Groot woordenboek van de Nederlandse taal  , "Van Dale Groot woordenboek van de Nederlandse taal is a Dutch dictionary containing over 268,826 headwords" 
 ^  "Welkom bij de GTB van het INL" . Gtb.inl.nl . Retrieved 2012-08-19 . &#160; 
 ^  (Dutch) www.vandale.nl 
 ^  "onzetaal.nl" . onzetaal.nl . Retrieved 2013-10-17 . &#160; 
 ^  a   b  (Dutch) Nederlands studeren wereldwijd , Nederlandse Taalunie, 2005 
 ^  (Dutch) Het Nederlands op Surinaamse scholen . Short documentary on Dutch in Surinamese schools by the Nederlandse Taalunie 
 ^  Dutch worldwide: Indonesia: old ties , Nederlandse Taalunie, 2008 
 ^  Waar ben je nou? Nederlands leren in Indonesië  . Short documentary on Dutch in Indonesia by the Nederlandse Taalunie 
 ^  (Dutch) Neerlandistiek Wereldwijd , Nederlandse Taalunie, 2007 
 
 
 Bibliography  
 
 
 Abraham, Werner (2006), Bare and prepositional differential case marking , in Kulikov, L.I.; Malchukov, A.L.; De Swart, Peter, "Case, valency and transitivity", Studies in Language (John Benjamins Publishing Company) 77 , retrieved 2010-11-06 &#160; 
 Adegbija, Efurosibina E. (1994), Language Attitudes in Sub-Saharan Africa: A Sociolinguistic Overview , Multilingual Matters , retrieved 2008-11-10 &#160; 
 Alant, Jaco (2004), Parlons Afrikaans (in French), Éditions L'Harmattan , retrieved 2010-06-03 &#160; 
 Ammon, Ulrich (2006), Sociolinguistics: an international handbook of the science of language and society (3), Walter de Gruyter , retrieved 2010-06-29 &#160; 
 Baker, Colin; Prys Jones, Sylvia (1997), Encyclopedia of bilingualism and bilingual education , Multilingual Matters Ltd. , retrieved 2010-05-19 &#160; 
 Berdichevsky, Norman (2004), Nations, language, and citizenship , Norman Berdichevsky , retrieved 2010-05-31 &#160; 
 Batibo, Herman (2005), Language decline and death in Africa: causes, consequences, and challenges , Multilingual Matters Ltd , retrieved 2010-05-24 &#160; 
 Booij, Geert (1995), "The Phonology of Dutch." , Oxford Linguistics ( Oxford University Press ) , retrieved 2010-05-24 &#160; 
 Booij, Geert (2003), "Constructional idioms and periphrasis: the progressive construction in Dutch." , Paradigms and Periphrasis ( University of Kentucky ) , retrieved 2010-05-19 &#160; 
 Brachin, Pierre; Vincent, Paul (1985), The Dutch Language: A Survey , Brill Archive , retrieved 2008-11-03 &#160; 
 Bromber, Katrin; Smieja, Birgit (2004), "Globalisation and African languages: risks and benefits" , Trends in Linguistics ( Walter de Gruyter ) , retrieved 2010-05-28 &#160; 
 Brook Napier, Diane (2007), Languages, language learning, and nationalism in South Africa , in Schuster, Katherine; Witkosky, David, "Language of the land: policy, politics, identity", Studies in the history of education (Information Age Publishing) , retrieved 2010-05-19 &#160; 
 Bussmann, Hadumod (2002), Gender across languages , John Benjamins Publishing Company , retrieved 2011-04-07 &#160; 
 Classe, Olive (2000), "Encyclopedia of Literary Translation into English" , Second Edition (Fitzroy Dearborn) , retrieved 2010-05-19 &#160; 
 Clyne, Michael G. (2003), Dynamics of language contact: English and immigrant languages , Cambridge University Press , retrieved 2011-04-07 &#160; 
 Crisma, Paola; Longobarde, Giuseppe (2009), "Historical syntax and linguistic theory" , Oxford linguistics ( Oxford University Press US) , retrieved 2010-11-06 &#160; 
 Czepluch, Hartmut; Abraham, Werner (2004), Focus on Germanic typology , Akademie Verlag , retrieved 2010-05-19 &#160; 
 Conradie, C. Jac (2005), "The final stages of deflection – The case of Afrikaans "het " " , Historical Linguistics 2005 ( John Benjamins Publishing Company ) , retrieved 2010-05-29 &#160; 
 De Bot, Kees; Lowie, Wander; Verspoor, Marjolyn (2005), Second language acquisition , Routledge , retrieved 2010-11-06 &#160; 
 Denning, Keith; Kessler, Brett; Leben, William R. (2007), English vocabulary elements , Oxford University Press US , retrieved 2010-05-19 &#160; 
 Deprez, Kas (1997), "Diets, Nederlands, Nederduits, Hollands, Vlaams, Belgisch Nederlands" , in Clyne, Michael G., Undoing and redoing corpus planning ( Walter de Gruyter ): 249–312 , retrieved 2011-05-10 &#160; 
 Deumert, Ana (2002), "Standardization and social networks – The emergence and diffusion of standard Afrikaans" , Standardization – Studies from the Germanic languages ( John Benjamins Publishing Company ) , retrieved 2010-05-29 &#160; 
 Deumert, Ana; Vandenbussche, Wim (2003), "Germanic standardizations: past to present" , Trends in Linguistics ( John Benjamins Publishing Company ) , retrieved 2010-05-28 &#160; 
 Deumert, Ana (2004), Language Standardization and Language Change: The Dynamics of Cape Dutch , John Benjamins Publishing Company , retrieved 2008-11-10 &#160; 
 de Swaan, Abram (2001), Words of the world: the global language system , A. de Swaan , retrieved 2010-06-03 &#160; 
 De Vogelaer, Gunther (2009), Changing pronominal gender in Dutch: transmission or diffusion? , in Tsiplakou, Stavroula; Karyolemou, Marilena; Pavlou, Pavlos Y., "Language variation—European perspectives II", International Conference on Language Variation in Europe (John Benjamins Publishing Company) , retrieved 2011-05-09 &#160; 
 Domínguez, Francesc; López, Núria (1995), Sociolinguistic and language planning organizations , John Benjamins Publishing Company , retrieved 2010-05-28 &#160; 
 Donaldson, Bruce C. (1993), A grammar of Afrikaans , Walter de Gruyter , retrieved 2010-05-28 &#160; 
 Egil Breivik, Leiv; Håkon Jahr, Ernst (1987), Language change: contributions to the study of its causes , Walter de Gruyter , retrieved 2010-05-19 &#160; 
 Erdentuğ, Aygen; Colombijn, Freek (2002), Urban ethnic encounters: the spatial consequences , Routledge , retrieved 2010-06-29 &#160; 
 European Commission (2010), "Flemish in France" , Research Centre of Multilingualism (Euromosaic) , retrieved 2010-06-29 &#160; 
 Fitzpatrick, Eileen (2007), "Corpus linguistics beyond the word: corpus research from phrase to discourse, Volume 2004" , Language and Computers: Studies in Practical Linguistics (Rodopi) 60 , retrieved 2010-11-09 &#160; 
 Geerts, G.; Clyne, Michael G. (1992), Pluricentric languages: differing norms in different nations , Walter de Gruyter , retrieved 2010-05-19 &#160; 
 Gooskens, Charlotte (2007), "The Contribution of Linguistic Factors to the Intelligibility of Closely Related Languages" , Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development, Volume 28, Issue 6 November 2007 ( University of Groningen ): 445–467 , retrieved 2010-05-19 &#160; 
 Heeringa, Wilbert; de Wet, Febe (2007), The origin of Afrikaans pronunciation: a comparison to west Germanic languages and Dutch dialects , University of Groningen , pp.&#160;445–467 , retrieved 2010-05-19 &#160; 
 Herriman, Michael L.; Burnaby, Barbara (1996), Language policies in English-dominant countries: six case studies , Multilingual Matters Ltd. , retrieved 2010-05-19 &#160; 
 Hiskens, Frans; Auer, Peter; Kerswill, Paul (2005), The study of dialect convergence and divergence: conceptual and methodological considerations. , Lancaster University , retrieved 2010-05-19 &#160; 
 Hogg, Richard M. (2002), An introduction to Old English , Oxford University Press US , retrieved 2010-11-06 &#160; 
 Holm, John A. (1989), Pidgins and Creoles: References survey , Cambridge University Press , retrieved 2010-05-19 &#160; 
 Ingram, David (1989), First language acquisition: method, description, and explanation , Cambridge University Press , retrieved 2010-11-06 &#160; 
 Jansen, Carel; Schreuder, Robert; Neijt, Anneke (2007), "The influence of spelling conventions on perceived plurality in compounds. A comparison of Afrikaans and Dutch." , Written Language &amp; Literacy 10:2 ( Radboud University Nijmegen ) , retrieved 2010-05-19 &#160;  
 Jones, Russell (2008), "Loan-words in Indonesian and Malay" , Indonesian Etymological Project, KITLV Office Jakarta (Yayasan Obor Indonesia) , retrieved 2010-06-29 &#160; 
 Jordens, Peter; Lalleman, Josine A. (1988), "Language development" , 5 (Walter de Gruyter) , retrieved 2010-11-06 &#160; 
 Kager, René (1989), "A metrical theory of stress and destressing in English and Dutch" , Linguistic models (Walter de Gruyter) 14 , retrieved 2010-06-29 &#160; 
 Kamwangamalu, Nkonko M. (2004), "The language planning situation in South Africa" , in Baldauf, Richard B.; Kaplan, Robert B., Language planning and policy in Africa , Multilingual Matters Ltd. , retrieved 2010-05-31 &#160; 
 Kennedy Wyld, Henry Cecil (2009), The Growth of English: An Elementary Account of the Present Form of Our Language, and Its Development , BiblioBazaar, LLC , retrieved 2010-11-06 &#160; 
 Langer, Nils; Davies, Winifred V. (2005), Linguistic purism in the Germanic languages , Walter de Gruyter , retrieved 2010-05-28 &#160; 
 Lass, Roger (1994), Old English: a historical linguistic companion , Cambridge University Press , retrieved 2010-11-06 &#160; 
 Lightfoot, David (1999), "The development of language: acquisition, change, and evolution" , Blackwell/Maryland lectures in language and cognition (Wiley-Blackwell) 1 , retrieved 2010-11-06 &#160; 
 Machan, Tim William (2009), Language anxiety: conflict and change in the history of English , Oxford University Press , retrieved 2010-06-03 &#160; 
 Maier, H.M.J. (2005), A Hidden Language – Dutch in Indonesia , Institute of European Studies, UC Berkeley , retrieved 2010-06-03 &#160; 
 Mallory, J.P.; Adams, Douglas Q. (2006), The Oxford introduction to Proto-Indo-European and the Proto-Indo-European world , Oxford University Press , retrieved 2010-05-31 &#160; 
 Maurer, Friedrich (1942), Nordgermanen und Alemannen: Studien zur germanischen und frühdeutschen Sprachgeschichte, Stammes- und Volkskunde , Strasbourg: Hünenburg. 
 McGoldrick, Monica; Giordano, Joseph; Garcia-Preto, Nydia (2005), Ethnicity and family therapy , Guilford Press , retrieved 2011-04-07 &#160; 
 McLean, Daryl; McCormick, Kay (1996), "English in South Africa 1940–1996" , in Fishman, Joshua A.; Conrad, Andrew W.; Rubal-Lopez, Alma, Post-imperial English: status change in former British and American colonies, 1940–1990 , Walter de Gruyter , retrieved 2010-05-31 &#160; 
 Mennen, Ineke; Levelt, Clara; Gerrits, Ellen (2006), "Acquisition of Dutch phonology: an overview." , Speech Science Research Centre Working Paper WP10 ( Queen Margaret University College ) , retrieved 2010-05-19 &#160; 
 Mesthrie, Rajend (1995), Language and Social History: Studies in South African Sociolinguistics , New Africa Books , retrieved 2008-08-23 &#160; 
 Mesthrie, Rajend (2002), Language in South Africa , Cambridge University Press , retrieved 2010-05-18 &#160; 
 Müller, Gereon (1995), A-bar syntax: a study in movement types , Walter de Gruyter , retrieved 2011-04-07 &#160; 
 Myers-Scotton, Carol (2006), Multiple voices: an introduction to bilingualism , Blackwell Publishing , retrieved 2010-05-31 &#160; 
 Niesler, Thomas; Louw, Philippa; Roux, Justus (2005), "Phonetic analysis of Afrikaans, English, Xhosa and Zulu using South African speech databases" , Southern African Linguistics and Applied Language Studies 23 (4): 459–474 &#160;  
 Onysko, Alexander; Michel, Sascha (2010), Cognitive Perspectives on Word Formation , Walter de Gruyter , retrieved 2011-04-07 &#160; 
 Palmer, Vernon Valentine (2001), Mixed jurisdictions worldwide: the third legal family , Vernon V. Palmer , retrieved 2010-06-03 &#160; 
 Page, Melvin Eugene; Sonnenburg, Penny M. (2003), Colonialism: an international, social, cultural, and political encyclopedia , Melvin E. Page , retrieved 2010-05-19 &#160; 
 Proost, Kristel (2006), Spuren der Kreolisierung im Lexikon des Afrikaans , in Proost, Kristel; Winkler, Edeltraud, "Von Intentionalität zur Bedeutung konventionalisierter Zeichen", Studien zur Deutschen Sprache (in German) (Gunter Narr Verlag) , retrieved 2010-06-03 &#160; 
 Putnam, Michael T. (2011), , John Benjamins Publishing Company , retrieved 2011-04-07 &#160; 
 Réguer, Laurent Philippe (2004), Si loin, si proche...: Une langue européenne à découvrir&#160;: le néerlandais (in French), Sorbonne Nouvelle , retrieved 2010-06-03 &#160; 
 Sebba, Mark (1997), Contact languages: pidgins and creoles , Palgrave Macmillan , retrieved 2010-05-19 &#160; 
 Sebba, Mark (2007), Spelling and society: the culture and politics of orthography around the world , Cambridge University Press , retrieved 2010-05-19 &#160; 
 Shetter, William Z.; Ham, Esther (2007), Dutch: an essential grammar , Taylor &amp; Francis , retrieved 2010-06-29 &#160; 
 Simpson, Andrew (2008), Language and national identity in Africa , Oxford University Press , retrieved 2010-05-31 &#160; 
 Simpson, J.M.Y. (2009), "Dutch" , in Brown, Keith; Ogilvie, Sarah, Concise encyclopedia of languages of the world , Elsevier , retrieved 2010-06-29 &#160; 
 Sneddon, James N. (2003), The Indonesian language: its history and role in modern society , UNSW Press , retrieved 2010-06-29 &#160; 
 Sonnenschein, E.A. (2008), A New English Grammar Based on the Recommendations of the Joint Committee on Grammatical Terminology , Read Books , retrieved 2010-11-06 &#160; 
 Stell, Gerard (2008–11), Mapping linguistic communication across colour divides: Black Afrikaans in Central South Africa , Vrije Universiteit Brussel , retrieved 2010-06-02 &#160; Check date values in: |date= ( help ) 
 Swan, Michael; Smith, Bernard (2001), Learner English: a teacher's guide to interference and other problems, Volume 1 , Cambridge University Press , retrieved 2011-04-07 &#160; 
 Tan, Mely G. (2008), "Etnis Tionghoa di Indonesia: kumpulan tulisan" , Ethnic Chinese in Indonesia; collected articles. (Yayasan Obor Indonesia) , retrieved 2010-06-0=29 &#160; Check date values in: |accessdate= ( help ) 
 Thomson, William R. (2003), "Indonesia" , in Page, Kogan, Asia &amp; Pacific Review 2003/04: The Economic and Business Report , Kogan Page Publishers, pp.&#160;76–85 , retrieved 2010-06-03 &#160; 
 Todd, Loreto (2004), Pidgins and Creoles , Routledge , retrieved 2010-11-06 &#160; 
 Vos, Mei Li (2001), International cooperation between politics and practice: how Dutch Indonesian cooperation changed remarkably little after a diplomatic rupture , Het Spinhuis , retrieved 2010-06-29 &#160; 
 Webb, Victor N. (2002), "Language in South Africa: the role of language in national transformation, reconstruction and development" , Impact Studies in Language and Society ( John Benjamins Publishing Company ) &#160; 
 Webb, Victor N. (2003), "Language policy development in South Africa" , Centre for Research in the Politics of Language ( University of Pretoria ) &#160;  
 Weissenborn, Jürgen; Höhle, Barbara (2001), "Approaches to bootstrapping" , Phonological, lexical, syntactic and neurophysiological aspects of early language acquisition (John Benjamins Publishing Company) 1 , retrieved 2010-11-06 &#160; 
 Willemyns, Roland (2013), Dutch: Biography of a language , Oxford UP, ISBN &#160; 9780199858712 &#160; 
 Namibian Population Census (2001), Languages Spoken in Namibia , Government of Namibia , retrieved 2010-05-28 &#160;  
 CIA (2010), The World Factbook (CIA) — Namibia , Central Intelligence Agency , retrieved 2010-05-28 &#160; 
 
 
 External links  
 
 
 
 Look up Category:Dutch language &#160;or Dutch in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Dutch language . 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Dutch 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikiversity has learning materials about Introduction to the Dutch language 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Dutch phrasebook . 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikisource has original text related to this article:
 Dutch Language 
 
 
 
 
 
 Organisations 
 
 
 The Nederlandse Taalunie , Dutch language union 
 
 
 Learning resources 
 
 
 Dutch , SAMPA information 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 &#160; 
 Links to related articles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 t 
 e 
 
 
 Modern West Germanic languages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Afrikaans 
 Dutch 
 English 
 German 
 Low German 
 Limburgish 
 Luxembourgish 
 North Frisian 
 Plautdietsch 
 Saterland Frisian 
 Scots 
 West Frisian 
 Yiddish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 t 
 e 
 
 
 Modern Germanic languages and dialects 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 North Germanic 
 
 
 
 
 West Scandinavian 
 
 
 
 Faroese 
 Icelandic 
 Norwegian ( Nynorsk ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 East Scandinavian 
 
 
 
 Danish 
 Norwegian ( Bokmål ) 
 Swedish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 West Germanic 
 
 
 
 
 Anglo-Frisian 
 
 
 
 English 
 North Frisian 
 Saterland Frisian 
 Scots 
 West Frisian 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Low Franconian 
 
 
 
 Afrikaans 
 Dutch 
 West Flemish 
 Limburgish 
 Zeelandic 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Low German / 
 Dutch Low Saxon 
 
 
 
 Achterhooks 
 Drèents 
 East Frisian Low Saxon 
 Gronings 
 Low German 
 Plautdietsch 
 Sallaans 
 Stellingwarfs 
 Tweants 
 Veluws 
 Westphalian 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 High German 
 
 
 
 
 Central German 
 
 
 
 Colognian 
 German 
 Luxembourgish 
 Palatine German 
 Pennsylvania German 
 Hunsrik 
 Silesian German 
 Upper Saxon 
 Wymysorys 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Upper German 
 
 
 
 Alsatian 
 Bavarian 
 Colonia Tovar 
 Main-Franconian 
 Cimbrian 
 Hutterite German 
 Mòcheno 
 Swabian 
 Swiss German 
 Walser 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yiddish 
 
 
 
 Yiddish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   



 								 
				Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dutch_language&amp;oldid=599029546 "				 
												 Categories : Languages with ISO 639-2 code Languages with ISO 639-1 code Dutch language Languages of Belgium Languages of the Netherlands Languages of Saint Martin Languages of the ABC Islands Low Franconian languages Stress-timed languages Subject–object–verb languages Verb-second languages  Hidden categories: Articles with Dutch-language external links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2013 Articles with dead external links from August 2012 Articles with French-language external links Articles with hAudio microformats Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2013 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2014 Articles to be expanded from November 2013 All articles to be expanded Articles with empty sections from November 2013 All articles with empty sections Articles including recorded pronunciations Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2013 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2013 CS1 errors: dates Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Netherlands Antilles articles correct after Dissolution  												 
							 
		 
		 
			 Navigation menu 
			 
				 
	 Personal tools 
	 
 Create account Log in 	 
 
				 
					 
	 Namespaces 
	 
					 Article 
					 Talk 
			 
 
 
	 
		 
	 Variants 
	 
		 
					 
	 
 
				 
				 
					 
	 Views 
	 
					 Read 
					 Edit 
					 View history 
			 
 
 
	 Actions 
	 
		 
					 
	 
 
 
	 Search 
	 
					 
					 		 
	 
 
				 
			 
			 
					 
				 
	 Navigation 
	 
		 
			 Main page 
			 Contents 
			 Featured content 
			 Current events 
			 Random article 
			 Donate to Wikipedia 
			 Wikimedia Shop 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Interaction 
	 
		 
			 Help 
			 About Wikipedia 
			 Community portal 
			 Recent changes 
			 Contact page 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Tools 
	 
		 
			 What links here 
			 Related changes 
			 Upload file 
			 Special pages 
			 Permanent link 
			 Page information 
			 Data item 
 Cite this page 		 
	 
 
 
	 Print/export 
	 
		 
			 Create a book 
			 Download as PDF 
			 Printable version 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Languages 
	 
		 
			 Адыгэбзэ 
			 Afrikaans 
			 Alemannisch 
			 አማርኛ 
			 Ænglisc 
			 العربية 
			 Aragonés 
			 ܐܪܡܝܐ 
			 Arpetan 
			 Asturianu 
			 Avañe'ẽ 
			 Azərbaycanca 
			 বাংলা 
			 Bân-lâm-gú 
			 Basa Banyumasan 
			 Беларуская 
			 Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ 
			 Български 
			 Boarisch 
			 Bosanski 
			 Brezhoneg 
			 Català 
			 Чӑвашла 
			 Cebuano 
			 Čeština 
			 Corsu 
			 Cymraeg 
			 Dansk 
			 Deitsch 
			 Deutsch 
			 ދިވެހިބަސް 
			 Dolnoserbski 
			 Eesti 
			 Ελληνικά 
			 Emiliàn e rumagnòl 
			 Español 
			 Esperanto 
			 Euskara 
			 فارسی 
			 Fiji Hindi 
			 Føroyskt 
			 Français 
			 Frysk 
			 Gaeilge 
			 Gaelg 
			 Gàidhlig 
			 Galego 
			 客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî 
			 한국어 
			 Հայերեն 
			 हिन्दी 
			 Hornjoserbsce 
			 Hrvatski 
			 Ido 
			 Ilokano 
			 Bahasa Indonesia 
			 Interlingua 
			 Ирон 
			 IsiXhosa 
			 IsiZulu 
			 Íslenska 
			 Italiano 
			 עברית 
			 Basa Jawa 
			 ქართული 
			 Қазақша 
			 Kernowek 
			 Kiswahili 
			 Коми 
			 Kurdî 
			 Ladino 
			 Latina 
			 Latviešu 
			 Lëtzebuergesch 
			 Lietuvių 
			 Ligure 
			 Limburgs 
			 Lingála 
			 Lumbaart 
			 Magyar 
			 Македонски 
			 മലയാളം 
			 मराठी 
			 مصرى 
			 Bahasa Melayu 
			 Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ 
			 Мокшень 
			 Nāhuatl 
			 Nederlands 
			 Nedersaksies 
			 日本語 
			 Нохчийн 
			 Nordfriisk 
			 Norsk bokmål 
			 Norsk nynorsk 
			 Novial 
			 Occitan 
			 Олык марий 
			 ਪੰਜਾਬੀ 
			 پنجابی 
			 Papiamentu 
			 Перем Коми 
			 Picard 
			 Piemontèis 
			 Plattdüütsch 
			 Polski 
			 Português 
			 Qırımtatarca 
			 Ripoarisch 
			 Română 
			 Rumantsch 
			 Runa Simi 
			 Русский 
			 Саха тыла 
			 Sámegiella 
			 संस्कृतम् 
			 Scots 
			 Seeltersk 
			 Sesotho 
			 Shqip 
			 Sicilianu 
			 Simple English 
			 Slovenčina 
			 Slovenščina 
			 Soomaaliga 
			 کوردی 
			 Sranantongo 
			 Српски / srpski 
			 Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски 
			 Basa Sunda 
			 Suomi 
			 Svenska 
			 Tagalog 
			 தமிழ் 
			 Татарча/tatarça 
			 ไทย 
			 Тоҷикӣ 
			 Türkçe 
			 Українська 
			 اردو 
			 ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche 
			 Vèneto 
			 Vepsän kel’ 
			 Tiếng Việt 
			 Võro 
			 Walon 
			 West-Vlams 
			 ייִדיש 
			 粵語 
			 Zazaki 
			 Zeêuws 
			 中文 
			 
			 Edit links 
		 
	 
 
			 
		 
		 
							 
											 This page was last modified on 10 March 2014 at 19:51. 
											 Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. 
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
									 
							 
											 Privacy policy 
											 About Wikipedia 
											 Disclaimers 
											 Contact Wikipedia 
											 Developers 
											 Mobile view