English language - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 





 
 
		 
		 
		 
			 
			 
						 
						 English language 
			 
								 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
								 
												 
					Jump to:					 navigation , 					 search 
				 
				 For other uses of "English", see English (disambiguation) . 
  
 
 
 English 
 
 
 Pronunciation 
 /  ˈ  ɪ  ŋ  ɡ  l  ɪ  ʃ  /   
 
 
 Region 
 (see below ) 
 
 
 
 Native speakers 
 
 360&#160;million &#160;(2010)  
 L2 : 430&#160;million or more (2003)  
 
 
 
 Language family 
 
 
 Indo-European 
 
 Germanic 
 
 West Germanic 
 
 Ingvaeonic 
 
 Anglo–Frisian 
 
 Anglic 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Early forms 
 
 
 Old English 
 
 Middle English 
 
 Early Modern English 
 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Writing system 
 
 Latin script ( English alphabet ) 
 English Braille 
 
 
 
 Signed form(s) 
 
 Manually coded English 
(multiple systems) 
 
 
 Official status 
 
 
 
 Official language&#160;in 
 
 54 countries 
 27 non-sovereign entities 
 
 Various organisations 
 
 United Nations 
 European Union 
 Commonwealth of Nations 
 Council of Europe 
 GUAM Organization for Democracy and Economic Development 
 ICC 
 IOC 
 ISO 
 NATO 
 NAFTA 
 OAS 
 OECD 
 OIC 
 OPEC 
 PIF 
 UKUSA Agreement 
 
 
 
 
 
 Language codes 
 
 
 ISO 639-1 
 en 
 
 
 ISO 639-2 
 eng 
 
 
 ISO 639-3 
 eng 
 
 
 Linguasphere 
 52-ABA 
 
 
 
 
 &#160; &#160;Countries where English is an official or de facto official language, or national language, and is spoken natively by the majority of the population 
 &#160; &#160;Countries where it is an official but not primary language 
 
 
 
 
 This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. 
 
 
 English is a West Germanic language that was first spoken in early medieval England and is now the most widely used language in the world.  It is widely learned as a second language and is an official language of the European Union , many Commonwealth countries and the United Nations , as well as in many world organisations. 
 English arose in the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms of England and what is now southeast Scotland . Following the extensive influence of Great Britain and the United Kingdom from the 17th to mid-20th centuries through the British Empire , it has been widely propagated around the world.  
 Historically, English originated from the fusion of closely related dialects, now collectively termed Old English , which were brought to the eastern coast of Great Britain by Germanic settlers ( Anglo-Saxons ) by the 5th century; the word English is derived from the name of the Angles ,  and ultimately from their ancestral region of Angeln (in what is now Schleswig-Holstein ). The language was also influenced early on by the Old Norse language through Viking invasions in the 9th and 10th centuries. 
 The Norman conquest of England in the 11th century gave rise to heavy borrowings from Norman French , and vocabulary and spelling conventions began to give the appearance of a close relationship with those of Latin-derived Romance languages (though English is not a Romance language itself)  to what had then become Middle English . The Great Vowel Shift that began in the south of England in the 15th century is one of the historical events that mark the emergence of Modern English from Middle English. 
 In addition to its Anglo-Saxon and Norman French roots, a significant number of English words are constructed on the basis of roots from Latin , because Latin in some form was the lingua franca of the Christian Church and of European intellectual life  and remains the wellspring of much modern scientific and technical vocabulary . 
 Owing to the assimilation of words from many other languages throughout history, modern English contains a very large vocabulary, with complex and irregular spelling, particularly of vowels. Modern English has not only assimilated words from other European languages, but from all over the world. The Oxford English Dictionary lists more than 250,000 distinct words, not including many technical, scientific, and slang terms.  
 
 
 
 Contents 
 
 
 1 Etymology 
 2 Significance 
 3 History 
 4 Classification and related languages 
 
 4.1 Germanic family 
 4.2 Impact of Old Norse 
 4.3 Other Germanic languages 
 4.4 French 
 
 
 5 Geographical distribution 
 
 5.1 English-speaking countries in order of total speakers 
 5.2 Countries where English is a major language 
 5.3 English as a global language 
 
 
 6 Dialects and varieties 
 
 6.1 Register effects 
 6.2 Formal written English 
 6.3 Simplified and constructed varieties 
 
 
 7 Phonology 
 
 7.1 Consonants 
 7.2 Vowels 
 7.3 Stress, rhythm and intonation 
 
 
 8 Grammar 
 9 Vocabulary 
 
 9.1 Number of words in English 
 9.2 Word origins 
 
 9.2.1 Words of Old Norse origin 
 9.2.2 Words of French origin 
 9.2.3 Words of Dutch and Low German origin 
 
 
 
 
 10 Writing system 
 11 See also 
 12 References 
 
 12.1 Bibliography 
 
 
 13 Further reading 
 14 External links 
 
 
 
 Etymology 
 The word English derives from the eponym Angle , the name of a Germanic tribe thought to originate from the Angeln area of Jutland , now in northern Germany.  For possible etymologies of these words, see the articles Angeln and Angles . 
 Significance 
 See also: Anglosphere 
 Modern English, sometimes described as the first global lingua franca ,  English equalled and may have surpassed French as the dominant language of diplomacy during the second half of the 19th century. 
 A working knowledge of English has become a requirement in a number of fields, occupations and professions such as medicine and computing; as a consequence, more than a billion people speak English to at least a basic level (see English as a second or foreign language ). It is one of six official languages of the United Nations .  
 One impact of the growth of English is the reduction of native linguistic diversity in many parts of the world. The influence of English continues to play an important role in language attrition .  
 History 
 Main article: History of the English language 
 
 
 
  
The first sentence of Beowulf (above) reads in Old English, "Hƿæt ƿē Gārdena ingēar dagum þēod cyninga þrym ge frunon," which means, "Listen! We of the Spear-Danes from days of yore have heard of the glory of the folk-kings." 
 
 
 English originated in those dialects of North Sea Germanic that were carried to Britain by Germanic settlers from various parts of what are now the Netherlands, northwest Germany, and Denmark.  
 Initially, Old English was a diverse group of dialects, reflecting the varied origins of Anglo-Saxon England  but the West Saxon dialect eventually came to dominate, and it is in this that the poem Beowulf is written. 
 Old English was later transformed by two waves of invasion. The first was by speakers of the North Germanic language branch when Halfdan Ragnarsson and Ivar the Boneless started the conquering and colonisation of northern parts of the British Isles in the 8th and 9th centuries (see Danelaw ). The second was by speakers of the Romance language Old Norman in the 11th century with the Norman conquest of England . Norman developed into Anglo-Norman , and then Anglo-French – and introduced a layer of words especially via the courts and government. As well as extending the lexicon with Scandinavian and Norman words, these two events simplified the grammar and transformed English into a borrowing language—unusually open to accepting new words from other languages. 
 The linguistic shifts in English following the Norman invasion produced what is now referred to as Middle English ; Geoffrey Chaucer 's The Canterbury Tales is its best-known work. Throughout this period, Latin in some form was the lingua franca of European intellectual life – first the Medieval Latin of the Christian Church, and later the humanist Renaissance Latin – and those who wrote or copied texts in Latin  commonly coined new terms from that language to refer to things or concepts for which there was no native English word. 
 Modern English , which includes the works of William Shakespeare  and the King James Version of the Bible, is generally dated from about 1550, and after the United Kingdom became a colonial power, English served as the lingua franca of the colonies of the British Empire . In the post-colonial period, some of the newly created nations that had multiple indigenous languages opted to continue using English as the lingua franca to avoid the political difficulties inherent in promoting any one indigenous language above the others. As a result of the growth of the British Empire, English was adopted in North America, India, Africa, Australia and many other regions – a trend that was reinforced by the emergence of the United States as a superpower in the mid-20th century. 
 Classification and related languages 
 Germanic family 
 The English language belongs to the Anglo-Frisian sub-group of the West Germanic branch of the Germanic languages , a member of the Indo-European languages . Modern English is the direct descendant of Middle English , itself a direct descendant of Old English , a descendant of the Proto-Germanic language . Typical of most Germanic languages, English is characterised by the use of modal verbs , the division of verbs into strong and weak classes, and common sound shifts from Proto-Indo-European known as Grimm's law . The closest living relatives of English (besides the English languages and English-based creole languages ) are the Frisian languages of the southern fringes of the North Sea in the Netherlands , Germany , and Denmark . 
 After Frisian come those Germanic languages that are more distantly related: the non-Anglo-Frisian West Germanic languages ( Dutch , Afrikaans , Low German , High German , Yiddish ), and the North Germanic languages ( Swedish , Danish , Norwegian , Icelandic , and Faroese ). None of the Continental Germanic languages is mutually intelligible with English, owing in part to divergences in lexis , syntax , semantics , and phonology , and to the isolation afforded to English by the British Isles, although some, such as Dutch, do show strong affinities with English, especially to its earlier stages. Isolation has allowed English (as well as Icelandic and Faroese) to develop independently of the Continental Germanic languages and their influences.  
 
 
 
  
The 2nd-century Øvre Stabu spearhead , which reads Raunijaz ("tester") in North Proto-Germanic , one of the earliest written samples of a Germanic language. 
 
 
 In addition to isolation, lexical differences between English and other Germanic languages exist due to diachronic change , semantic drift , and to substantial borrowing in English of words from other languages, especially Latin and French (though borrowing is in no way unique to English). For example, compare "exit" (Latin), vs. Dutch uitgang and German Ausgang (literally "out-going", though outgang continues to survive dialectally) and "change" (French) vs. Dutch verandering and German Änderung (literally "elsing, othering", i.e. "alteration"); "movement" (French) vs. Dutch beweging and German Bewegung (" beway -ing", i.e. "proceeding along the way"); etc. With the exception of exit (a Modern English borrowing), Middle English had already distanced itself from other Germanic languages, having the terms wharf , schift (="shift"), and wending for "change"; and already by Old English times the word bewegan meant "to cover, envelop", rather than "to move". Preference of one synonym over another also causes differentiation in lexis, even where both words are Germanic, as in English care vs. German Sorge . Both words descend from Proto-Germanic * karō and * surgō respectively, but * karō has become the dominant word in English for "care" while in German, Dutch, and Scandinavian languages, the * surgō root prevailed. * Surgō still survives in English, however, as sorrow . 
 Despite extensive lexical borrowing, the workings of the English language are resolutely Germanic, and English remains classified as a Germanic language due to its structure and grammar. Borrowed words get incorporated into a Germanic system of conjugation, declension, and syntax, and behave exactly as though they were native Germanic words from Old English. For example, the word reduce is borrowed from Latin redūcere ; however, in English one says "I reduc e – I reduc ed – I will reduc e " rather than "redūc ō – redū xī – redūc am " ; likewise, we say: "John' s life insurance company" (cf. Dutch "John s levensverzekeringsmaatschappij"  rather than "the company of insurance life of John" , cf. the French: la compagnie d'assurance-vie de John ). Furthermore, in English, all basic grammatical particles added to nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs are Germanic. For nouns, these include the normal plural marker -s / -es ( apple – apple s ; cf. Frisian appel – appel s ; Dutch appel – appel s ; Afrikaans appel – appel s ), and the possessive markers -'s ( Brad' s hat ; German Brad s Hut ; Danish Brad s hat ) and -s' . 
 For verbs, these include the third-person present ending -s / -es (e.g. he stand s / he reach es ), the present participle ending -ing (cf. Dutch -ende ; German -end(e) ), the simple past tense and past participle ending -ed (Swedish -ade / -ad ), and the formation of the English infinitive using to (e.g. " to drive"; cf. Old English tō drīfenne; Dutch te drijven ; Low German to drieven ; German zu treiben ). Adverbs generally receive an -ly ending (cf. German -lich ; Swedish -ligt ), and adjectives and adverbs are inflected for the comparative and superlative using -er and -est (e.g. hard/hard er /hard est ; cf. Dutch hard/hard er /hard st ), or through a combination with more and most (cf. Swedish mer and mest ). These particles append freely to all English words regardless of origin ( tsunami s ; communicate s ; to buccaneer; dur ing ; calm er ; bizarre ly ) and all derive from Old English. Even the lack or absence of affixes, known as zero or null (-Ø) affixes , derives from endings that previously existed in Old English (usually -e, -a, -u, -o, -an, etc.), that later weakened to -e , and have since ceased to be pronounced and spelt (e.g. Modern English "I sing" = I sing-Ø &lt; I singe &lt; Old English ic sing e ; "we thought" = we thought-Ø &lt; we thoughte(n) &lt; Old English wē þōht on ). 
 Impact of Old Norse 
 Due to the Viking colonisation and influence of Old Norse on Middle English, English syntax follows a pattern similar to that of North Germanic languages, such as Danish, Swedish, and Icelandic, in contrast with other West Germanic languages, such as Dutch and German. This is especially evident in the order and placement of verbs. For example, English "I will never see you again" = Danish "Jeg vil aldrig se dig igen"; Icelandic "Ég mun aldrei sjá þig aftur", whereas in Dutch and German the main verb is placed at the end (e.g. Dutch "Ik zal je nooit weer zien "; German "Ich werde dich nie wieder sehen ", literally, "I will you never again see "). This is also observable in perfect tense constructions, as in English "I have never seen anything in the square" = Danish "Jeg har aldrig set noget på torvet"; Icelandic "Ég hef aldrei séð neitt á torginu", where Dutch and German place the past participle at the end (e.g. Dutch "Ik heb nooit iets op het plein gezien "; German "Ich habe nie etwas auf dem Platz gesehen ", literally, "I have never anything in the square seen "). As in most Germanic languages, English adjectives usually come before the noun they modify, even when the adjective is of Latinate origin (e.g. medical emergency, national treasure ). English continues to make extensive use of self-explaining compounds (e.g. streetcar, classroom ) and nouns that serve as modifiers (e.g. lamp post, life insurance company ) – traits inherited from Old English (See also Kenning ). 
 The kinship with other Germanic languages can also be seen in the tensing of English verbs (e.g. English fall/fell/fallen/will or shall fall , West Frisian fal/foel/fallen/sil falle , Dutch vallen/viel/gevallen/zullen vallen , German fallen/fiel/gefallen/werden fallen , Norwegian faller/falt/falt or falne/vil or skal falle ), the comparatives of adjectives and adverbs (e.g. English good/better/best , West Frisian goed/better/best , Dutch goed/beter/best , German gut/besser/best ), the treatment of nouns (English shoemaker, shoemaker's, shoemakers, shoemakers' ; Dutch schoenmaker, schoenmakers, schoenmakers, schoenmakeren ; Swedish skomakare, skomakares, skomakare, skomakares ), and the large amount of cognates (e.g. English wet , Scots weet , West Frisian wiet , Swedish våt ; English send , Dutch zenden , German senden ; English meaning , Swedish mening , Icelandic meining , etc.). 
 It occasionally gives rise to false friends (e.g. English time vs Norwegian time , meaning "hour"  However, a few other Germanic languages, more closely related to English than German, also share this same semantic shift, namely Low German (i.e. Low German Tīde = "tide of the sea") and Dutch (Dutch getijde, tij = "tide of the sea"). 
 Some North Germanic words entered English from the settlement of Viking raiders and Danish invasions that began around the 9th century (see Danelaw ). Many of these words are common and are often mistaken for being native, which shows how close-knit the relations between the English and the Scandinavian settlers were ( see below: Words of Old Norse origin ). Dutch and Low German also had a considerable influence on English vocabulary, contributing common everyday terms and many nautical and trading terms ( see below: Words of Dutch and Low German origin ). 
 Other Germanic languages 
 English has been forming compound words and affixing existing words separately from the other Germanic languages for more than 1500 years but shows different patterns in this regard. For instance, abstract nouns in English may be formed from native words by the suffixes "‑hood", "-ship", "-dom" and "-ness". All of these suffixes have cognates in most or all other Germanic languages, but their usage has diverged, as German "Freiheit" vs. English "freedom" (the suffix "-heit" being cognate with English "-hood", while English "-dom" is cognate with German "-tum"; but note North Frisian fridoem , Dutch vrijdom , Norwegian fridom , "freedom"). The Germanic languages Icelandic and Faroese also follow English in this respect, since, like English, they developed independent of German influences. 
 French 
 Many French words are also intelligible to an English speaker, especially when they are seen in writing (as pronunciations are often quite different), because English absorbed a large vocabulary from Norman and French, via Anglo-Norman after the Norman Conquest, and directly from French in subsequent centuries. As a result, a large portion of English vocabulary is derived from French, with some minor spelling differences (e.g. inflectional endings, use of old French spellings, lack of diacritics , etc.), as well as occasional divergences in meaning of so-called false friends: for example, compare " library " with the French librairie , which means bookstore ; in French, the word for "library" is bibliothèque . The pronunciation of most French loanwords in English (with the exception of a handful of more recently borrowed words such as mirage , genre , café ; or phrases like coup d'état , rendez-vous , etc.) has become largely anglicised and follows a typically English phonology and pattern of stress (compare English "nature" vs. French nature , "button" vs. bouton , "table" vs. table , "hour" vs. heure , "reside" vs. résider , etc.). 
 
 Geographical distribution 
 "English-speaking world" redirects here. For the cultural region, see Anglosphere . 
 See also: List of countries where English is an official language , List of countries by English-speaking population ,&#160;and British Empire 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pie chart showing the relative proportions of native English speakers in the major English-speaking countries of the world 
 &#160; &#160;US (58.5%) 
 &#160; &#160;UK (15.8%) 
 &#160; &#160;Canada (4.7%) 
 &#160; &#160;Australia (4%) 
 &#160; &#160;Nigeria (1%) 
 &#160; &#160;Ireland (1%) 
 &#160; &#160;South Africa (1%) 
 &#160; &#160;New Zealand (0.9%) 
 &#160; &#160;Other (13.1%) 
 
 
 
 Approximately 375&#160;million people speak English as their first language .  
 Estimates that include second language speakers vary greatly from 470&#160;million to over a billion depending on how literacy or mastery is defined and measured.  
 The countries with the highest populations of native English speakers are, in descending order: the United States (226&#160;million),  
 Countries such as the Philippines , Jamaica and Nigeria also have millions of native speakers of dialect continua ranging from an English-based creole to a more standard version of English. Of those nations where English is spoken as a second language, India has the most such speakers ( see Indian English ). Crystal claims that, combining native and non-native speakers, India now has more people who speak or understand English than any other country in the world.  
 English-speaking countries in order of total speakers 
 
 
 Country 
 Total 
 Percent of population 
 First language 
 As an additional language 
 Population 
 Comment 
 
 
  United States 
 267,444,149 
 95% 
 225,505,953 
 41,938,196 
 280,950,438 
 Source: American Community Survey: Language Use in the United States: 2007 , Table 1. Figure for second language speakers are respondents who reported they do not speak English at home but know it "very well" or "well." Figures are for population age 5 and older. 
 
 
  India 
 125,344,736 
 12% 
 226,449 
 86,125,221 second language speakers. 
38,993,066 third language speakers 
 1,028,737,436 
 Source: Census 2001, Figures include both those who speak English as a second language and those who speak it as a third language .   
 
 
  Pakistan 
 88,690,000 
 49% 
 
 88,690,000 
 180,440,005 
 Source: Euromonitor International report 2009. " The Benefits of the English Language for Individuals and Societies: Quantitative Indicators from Cameroon,Nigeria, Rwanda, Bangladesh and Pakistan. " 'A custom report compiled by Euromonitor International for the British Council'. 
 
 
  Nigeria 
 79,000,000 
 53% 
 4,000,000 
 &gt;75,000,000 
 148,000,000 
 Figures are for speakers of Nigerian Pidgin , an English-based pidgin or creole. Ihemere gives a range of roughly 3 to 5&#160;million native speakers; the midpoint of the range is used in the table. Ihemere, Kelechukwu Uchechukwu (2006). "A Basic Description and Analytic Treatment of Noun Clauses in Nigerian Pidgin" . Nordic Journal of African Studies 15 (3): 296–313. &#160; 
 
 
  United Kingdom 
 59,600,000 
 98% 
 58,100,000 
 1,500,000 
 60,000,000 
 Source: Crystal (2005), p.&#160;109. 
 
 
  Philippines 
 48,800,000 
 58%  
 3,427,000  
 43,974,000 
 84,566,000 
 Total speakers: Census 2000, text above Figure 7 , 63.71% of the 66.7&#160;million people aged 5 years or more could speak English. Native speakers: Census 1995.   
 
 
  Canada 
 25,246,220 
 85% 
 17,694,830 
 7,551,390 
 29,639,030 
 Source: 2001 Census&#160;– Knowledge of Official Languages and Mother Tongue . The native speakers figure comprises 122,660 people with both French and English as a mother tongue, plus 17,572,170 people with English and not French as a mother tongue. 
 
 
  Australia 
 18,172,989 
 92% 
 15,581,329 
 2,591,660 
 19,855,288 
 Source: 2006 Census.  The figure shown in the first language English speakers column is actually the number of Australian residents who speak only English at home. The additional language column shows the number of other residents who claim to speak English "well" or "very well". Another 5% of residents did not state their home language or English proficiency. 
 
 
  South Africa 
 
 9.6% 
 4,892,623 
 
 51,770,560 
 Source: 2011 Census. Native speakers = people speaking English at home  
 
 
  Ireland 
 
 94% 
 
 
 4,588,252 
 Source: 2011 Census  
 
 
 &#160; New Zealand 
 3,673,626 
 91.2% 
 3,008,058 
 665,568 
 4,027,947 
 Source: 2006 Census.  The figures are people who can speak English with sufficient fluency to hold an everyday conversation. The figure shown in the first language English speakers column is actually the number of New Zealand residents who reported to speak English only, while the additional language column shows the number of New Zealand residents who reported to speak English as one of two or more languages. 
 
 
 Note: Total = First language + Other language; Percentage = Total / Population 
 
 
 Countries where English is a major language 
 Main article: List of countries where English is an official language 
 
 
 
  
 &#160; &#160;Countries where English is spoken natively by the majority of the population. 
 
 
 
 English is the primary language in Anguilla , Antigua and Barbuda , Australia , the Bahamas , Barbados , Belize , Bermuda , the British Indian Ocean Territory , the British Virgin Islands , Canada , the Cayman Islands , Dominica , the Falkland Islands , Gibraltar , Grenada , Guam , Guernsey , Guyana , Ireland , the Isle of Man , Jamaica , Jersey , Montserrat , Nauru , New Zealand , Pitcairn Islands , Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha , Saint Kitts and Nevis , Saint Vincent and the Grenadines , Singapore , South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands , Trinidad and Tobago , the Turks and Caicos Islands , the United Kingdom and the United States . 
 In some countries where English is not the most spoken language, it is an official language ; these countries include Botswana , Cameroon , the Federated States of Micronesia , Fiji , Gambia , Ghana , Hong Kong , India , Kenya , Kiribati , Lesotho , Liberia , Malta , the Marshall Islands , Mauritius , Namibia , Nigeria , Pakistan , Palau , Papua New Guinea , the Philippines ( Philippine English ), Rwanda , Saint Lucia , Samoa , Seychelles , Sierra Leone , the Solomon Islands , Sri Lanka , Sudan , South Sudan , Swaziland , Tanzania , Uganda , Zambia , and Zimbabwe . Also there are countries where in a part of the territory English became a co-official language, e.g. Colombia's San Andrés y Providencia and Nicaragua's Mosquito Coast . This was a result of the influence of British colonisation in the area. 
 English is one of the 11 official languages that are given equal status in South Africa ( South African English ). It is also the official language in current dependent territories of Australia ( Norfolk Island , Christmas Island and Cocos Island ) and of the United States ( American Samoa , Guam , Northern Mariana Islands , Puerto Rico (in Puerto Rico, English is co-official with Spanish), and the US Virgin Islands ),  and the former British colony of Hong Kong . (See List of countries where English is an official language for more details.) 
 Although the United States federal government has no official languages, English has been given official status by 30 of the 50 state governments.  Although falling short of official status, English is also an important language in several former colonies and protectorates of the United Kingdom, such as Bahrain , Bangladesh , Brunei , Cyprus , Malaysia , and the United Arab Emirates . 
 English as a global language 
 
 
 
  
Percent of national populations with knowledge of English
 &#160; &#160;80–100% 
 &#160; &#160;60–80% 
 &#160; &#160;40–60% 
 &#160; &#160;20–40% 
 &#160; &#160; 0–20% 
 
 
 
 See also: English in computing , International English , World Englishes , World language ,&#160;and English as a second or foreign language 
 Because English is so widely spoken, it has often been referred to as a " world language ", the lingua franca of the modern era,  communications. English is one of the official languages of the United Nations and many other international organisations, including the International Olympic Committee . 
 English is studied most often in the European Union, and the perception of the usefulness of foreign languages among Europeans is 67% in favour of English ahead of 17% for German and 16% for French (as of 2012). Among some of the non-English-speaking EU countries, the following percentages of the adult population claimed to be able to converse in English in 2012: 90% in the Netherlands, 89% in Malta, 86% in Sweden and Denmark, 73% in Cyprus and Austria, 70% in Finland, and over 50% in Greece, Luxembourg, Slovenia and Germany. In 2012, excluding native speakers, 38% of Europeans consider that they can speak English,  
 Books, magazines, and newspapers written in English are available in many countries around the world, and English is the most commonly used language in the sciences  with Science Citation Index reporting as early as 1997 that 95% of its articles were written in English, even though only half of them came from authors in English-speaking countries. 
 English literature predominates considerably with 28% of all volumes published in the world  
 This increasing use of the English language globally has had a large impact on many other languages, leading to language shift and even language death ,  
 Dialects and varieties 
 Main article: List of dialects of the English language 
 English has been subject to a large degree of regional dialect variation for many centuries. Its global spread now means that a large number of dialects and English-based creole languages and pidgins can be found all over the world. 
 Several educated native dialects of English have wide acceptance as standards in much of the world. In the United Kingdom much emphasis is placed on Received Pronunciation , an educated dialect of South East England . General American , which is spread over most of the United States and much of Canada, is more typically the model for the American continents and areas (such as the Philippines) that have had either close association with the United States, or a desire to be so identified. In Oceania , the major native dialect of Australian English is spoken as a first language by the vast majority of the inhabitants of the Australian continent, with General Australian serving as the standard accent. The English of neighbouring New Zealand as well as that of South Africa have to a lesser degree been influential native varieties of the language. 
 Aside from these major dialects, there are numerous other varieties of English, which include, in most cases, several subvarieties, such as Cockney , Scouse and Geordie within British English ; Newfoundland English within Canadian English ; and African American Vernacular English ("Ebonics") and Southern American English within American English . English is a pluricentric language , without a central language authority like France's Académie française ; and therefore no one variety is considered "correct" or "incorrect" except in terms of the expectations of the particular audience to which the language is directed. 
 Scots has its origins in early Northern Middle English  There are a number of regional dialects of Scots, and pronunciation, grammar and lexis of the traditional forms differ, sometimes substantially, from other varieties of English. 
 English speakers have many different accents , which often signal the speaker's native dialect or language. For the most distinctive characteristics of regional accents, see Regional accents of English , and for a complete list of regional dialects, see List of dialects of the English language . Within England, variation is now largely confined to pronunciation rather than grammar or vocabulary. At the time of the Survey of English Dialects , grammar and vocabulary differed across the country, but a process of lexical attrition has led most of this variation to die out.  
 Just as English itself has borrowed words from many different languages over its history, English loanwords now appear in many languages around the world, indicative of the technological and cultural influence of its speakers. Several pidgins and creole languages have been formed on an English base, such as Jamaican Patois , Nigerian Pidgin , and Tok Pisin . There are many words in English coined to describe forms of particular non-English languages that contain a very high proportion of English words. 
 Register effects 
 It is well-established  that informal speech registers tend to be made up predominantly of words of Anglo-Saxon or Germanic origin, whereas the proportion of the vocabulary that is of Latinate origins is likely to be higher in legal, scientific, and otherwise scholarly or academic texts. 
 Child-directed speech , which is an informal speech register, also tends to rely heavily on vocabulary rife in words derived from Anglo-Saxon. The speech of mothers to young children has a higher percentage of native Anglo-Saxon verb tokens than speech addressed to adults.  The Anglo-Saxon verb vocabulary consists of short verbs, but its grammar is relatively complex. Syntactic patterns specific to this sub-vocabulary in present-day English include periphrastic constructions for tense, aspect, questioning and negation, and phrasal lexemes functioning as complex predicates, all of which also occur in child-directed speech. 
 The historical origin of vocabulary items affects the order of acquisition of various aspects of language development in English-speaking children. Latinate vocabulary is in general a later acquisition in children than the native Anglo-Saxon one.  
 Formal written English 
 Main article: Formal written English 
 A version of the language almost universally agreed upon by educated English-speakers around the world is called formal written English. It takes virtually the same form regardless of where it is written, in contrast to spoken English, which differs significantly between dialects , accents , and varieties of slang and of colloquial and regional expressions. Local variations in the formal written version of the language are quite limited, being restricted largely to minor spelling, lexical and grammatical differences between different national varieties of English (e.g. British, American , Indian , Australian , South African , etc.). 
 Simplified and constructed varieties 
 Artificially simplified versions of the language have been created that are easier for non-native speakers to read. Basic English is a constructed language , with a restricted number of words, created by Charles Kay Ogden and described in his book Basic English: A General Introduction with Rules and Grammar (1930). Ogden said that it would take seven years to learn English, seven months for Esperanto , and seven weeks for Basic English.  Thus, Basic English may be employed by companies that need to make complex books for international use, as well as by language schools that need to impart some knowledge of English in a short time. 
 Ogden did not include any words in Basic English that could be said instead with a combination of other words already in the Basic English lexicon, and he worked to make the vocabulary suitable for speakers of any other language. He put his vocabulary selections through a large number of tests and adjustments. Ogden also simplified the grammar but tried to keep it normal for English users. Although it was not built into a program, similar simplifications were devised for various international uses. 
 Simplified English is a controlled language originally developed for aerospace industry maintenance manuals. It employs a carefully limited and standardised  subset of English. Simplified English has a lexicon of approved words and those words can only be used in certain ways. For example, the word close can be used in the phrase "Close the door" but not "do not go close to the landing gear". 
 Other constructed varieties of English include: 
 
 E-Prime excludes forms of the verb to be . 
 English reform is an attempt to improve collectively upon the English language. 
 Manually Coded English consists of a variety of systems that have been developed to represent the English language with hand signals, designed primarily for use in deaf education. These should not be confused with true sign languages such as British Sign Language and American Sign Language used in Anglophone countries, which are independent and not based on English. 
 Seaspeak and the related Airspeak and PoliceSpeak , all based on restricted vocabularies, were designed by Edward Johnson starting from the 1980s to aid international cooperation and communication in specific areas. 
 Special English is a simplified version of English used by the Voice of America . It uses a vocabulary of only 1500 words. 
 
 Phonology 
 Main article: English phonology 
 The phonology (sound system) of English differs between dialects. The descriptions below are most closely applicable to the standard varieties known as Received Pronunciation (RP) and General American . For information concerning a range of other varieties, see IPA chart for English dialects . 
 Consonants 
 The table below shows the system of consonant phonemes that functions in most major varieties of English. The symbols are from the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA), and are used in the pronunciation keys of many dictionaries. For more detailed information see English phonology: Consonants . 
 
 Consonant phonemes 
 
 
 Bilabial 
 Labio- 
dental 
 Dental 
 Alveolar 
 Post- 
alveolar 
 Palatal 
 Velar 
 Glottal 
 
 
 Nasal 
 
 m 
 
 
 
 n 
 
 
 
 ŋ 
 
 
 
 Stop 
 p 
 b 
 
 
 t 
 d 
 
 
 k 
 ɡ 
 
 
 
 Affricate 
 
 
 
 
 tʃ 
 dʒ 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fricative 
 
 f 
 v 
 θ 
 ð 
 s 
 z 
 ʃ 
 ʒ 
 
 ( x ) 
 
 h 
 
 
 
 Approximant 
( Lateral ) 
 
 
 
 
 r 
 
 
 j 
 
 w 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 l 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Where consonants are given in pairs (as with "p b"), the first is voiceless , the second is voiced. Most of the symbols represent the same sounds as they normally do when used as letters (see Writing system below), but /j/ represents the initial sound of y acht . The symbol /ʃ/ represents the sh sound, /ʒ/ the middle sound of vi si on , /tʃ/ the ch sound, /dʒ/ the sound of j in j ump , /θ/ and /ð/ the th sounds in th ing and th is respectively, and /ŋ/ the ng sound in si ng . The voiceless velar fricative /x/ is not a regular phoneme in most varieties of English, although it is used by some speakers in Scots/Gaelic words such as lo ch or in other loanwords such as Ch anukah . 
 Some of the more significant variations in the pronunciation of consonants are these: 
 
 In non- rhotic accents such as Received Pronunciation and Australian English, /r/ can only appear before a vowel (there is no "r" sound in words like card ). The actual pronunciation of /r/ varies between dialects; most common is the alveolar approximant  . 
 In North American English and Australian English , /t/ and /d/ are flapped  This means that word pairs such as latter and ladder may approach homophones for speakers of these dialects. 
 The th sounds /θ/ and /ð/ are sometimes pronounced as /f/ and /v/ in Cockney , and as dental plosives (contrasting with the usual alveolar plosives) in some Irish varieties. In African American Vernacular English , /ð/ has merged with dental /d/ . 
 A voiceless w ,  , sometimes written /hw/ , for the wh in words like wh en and wh ich , is preserved in Scottish and Irish English and by some speakers elsewhere. 
 The voiceless plosives /p/ , /t/ and /k/ are frequently aspirated , particularly at the start of stressed syllables, but they are not aspirated after an initial /s/ , as in spin . 
 
 Vowels 
 The system of vowel phonemes and their pronunciation is subject to significant variation between dialects. The table below lists the vowels found in Received Pronunciation (RP) and General American, with examples of words in which they occur. The vowels are represented with symbols from the International Phonetic Alphabet ; those given for RP are in relatively standard use in British dictionaries and other publications. For more detailed information see English phonology: Vowels . 
 
 
 
 
 
 RP 
 GAm 
 word 
 
 
 monophthongs 
 
 
 iː 
 i 
 n ee d 
 
 
 ɪ 
 ɪ 
 b i d 
 
 
 e 
 ɛ 
 b e d 
 
 
 æ 
 æ 
 b a ck 
 
 
 ɒ 
 ( ɑ ) 
 b o x 
 
 
 ɔː 
 ɔ 
 p aw 
 
 
 ɑː 
 ɑ 
 br a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 RP 
 GAm 
 word 
 
 
 monophthongs (cont.) 
 
 
 ʊ 
 ʊ 
 g oo d 
 
 
 uː 
 u 
 f oo d 
 
 
 ʌ 
 ʌ 
 b u t 
 
 
 ɜː 
 ɜr 
 b ir d 
 
 
 ə 
 ə 
 comm a 
 
 
 ( ɪ ) 
 ɨ 
 ros e s 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 RP 
 GAm 
 word 
 
 
 diphthongs 
 
 
 eɪ 
 eɪ 
 b ay 
 
 
 əʊ 
 oʊ 
 r oa d 
 
 
 aɪ 
 aɪ 
 cr y 
 
 
 aʊ 
 aʊ 
 c ow 
 
 
 ɔɪ 
 ɔɪ 
 b oy 
 
 
 ɪə 
 (ɪr) 
 f ear 
 
 
 ɛə 
 (ɛr) 
 f air 
 
 
 ʊə 
 (ʊr) 
 l ure 
 
 
 
 
 
 Some points to note: 
 
 For words which in RP have /ɒ/ , most North American dialects have /ɑ/ (as in the example of b o x above) or /ɔ/ (as in cl o th ). However some North American varieties do not have the vowel /ɔ/ at all (except before /r/ ); see cot–caught merger . 
 In present-day Received Pronunciation, the realisation of the /æ/ phoneme is more open than the symbol suggests, and is closer to  
 In General American and some other rhotic accents , the combination of vowel+ /r/ is often realised as an r-coloured vowel . For example, butt er /ˈbʌtər/ is pronounced with an r-coloured schwa,  . 
 The vowel conventionally written /ʌ/ is actually pronounced more centrally, as , in RP. In the northern half of England this vowel is replaced by /ʊ/ (so cut rhymes with put ). 
 In unstressed syllables there may or may not be a distinction between /ə/ ( schwa ) and /ɪ/ ( /ɨ/ ). So for some speakers there is no difference between ros e s and Ros a' s . For more information see Reduced vowels in English . 
 The diphthongs /eɪ/ and /əʊ/ ( /oʊ/ ) tend towards the monophthongal pronunciations  in some dialects, including Canadian, Scottish, Irish and Northern English. 
 In parts of North America /aɪ/ is pronounced  in this position. See Canadian raising . 
 The sound /ʊə/ is coming to be replaced by /ɔː/ in many words; for example, sure is often pronounced like shore . See English-language vowel changes before historic r . 
 
 Stress, rhythm and intonation 
 English is a strongly stressed language. In content words of any number of syllables, as well as function words of more than one syllable, there will be at least one syllable with lexical stress. An example of this is ci vili za tion , in which the first and fourth syllables carry stress, and the other syllables are unstressed.  The position of stress in English words is not predictable. English also has strong prosodic stress : typically the last stressed syllable of a phrase receives extra emphasis, but this may also occur on words to which a speaker wishes to draw attention. As regards rhythm , English is classed as a stress-timed language: one in which there is a tendency for the time intervals between stressed syllables to become equal, and therefore to shorten unstressed syllables. It is uncertain when English became stress-timed, but as most other surviving Germanic languages are it may date to before the breakup of proto-West Germanic. 
 Stress in English is sometimes phonemic ; that is, capable of distinguishing words. In particular, many words used as verbs and nouns have developed different stress patterns for each use: for example, increase is stressed on the first syllable as a noun, giving in crease , but on the second syllable as a verb, giving in crease ; see also Initial-stress-derived noun . Closely related to stress in English is the process of vowel reduction ; for example, in the noun con tract the first syllable is stressed and contains the vowel /ɒ/ (in RP), whereas in the verb con tract the first syllable is unstressed and its vowel is reduced to /ə/ ( schwa ).  The same process applies to certain common function words like of , which are pronounced with different vowels depending on whether or not they are stressed within the sentence. For more details, see Reduced vowels in English . Despite these practices, phonemic stress in English is generally a convention rather than essential to distinguish homophones: in both these examples, whether the word is being used as a noun or verb should normally be clear from context. 
 As concerns intonation , the pitch of the voice is used syntactically in English; for example, to convey whether the speaker is certain or uncertain about the polarity: most varieties of English use falling pitch for definite statements, and rising pitch to express uncertainty, as in yes–no questions . There is also a characteristic change of pitch on strongly stressed syllables, particularly on the "nuclear" (most strongly stressed) syllable in a sentence or intonation group. For more details see Intonation (linguistics): Intonation in English . 
 Grammar 
 Main article: English grammar 
 English grammar has minimal inflection compared with most other Indo-European languages . For example, Modern English, unlike Modern German or Dutch and the Romance languages , lacks grammatical gender and adjectival agreement . Case marking has almost disappeared from the language and mainly survives in pronouns . The patterning of strong (e.g. speak/spoke/spoken ) versus weak verbs (e.g. love/loved or kick/kicked ) inherited from its Germanic origins has declined in importance in modern English, and the remnants of inflection (such as plural marking) have become more regular. 
 At the same time, the language has become more analytic , and has developed features such as modal verbs and word order as resources for conveying meaning. Auxiliary verbs mark constructions such as questions, negative polarity, the passive voice and progressive aspect . English word order has moved from the Germanic V2 word order to being almost exclusively subject-verb-object ; as English makes extensive use of auxiliary verbs, this will often create clusters of two or more verbs at the centre of the sentence, such as "he had hoped to try to open it" . The long literary history of English has also created many conventions regarding the use of techniques such as verbal nouns and relative clauses to express complex ideas in formal writing. 
 Vocabulary 
 English vocabulary has changed considerably over the centuries.  
 Like many languages deriving from Proto-Indo-European (PIE), many of the most common words in English can trace back their origin (through the Germanic branch) to PIE. Such words include the basic pronouns I , from Old English ic , (cf. German Ich , Gothic ik , Latin ego , Greek ego , Sanskrit aham ), me (cf. German mich, mir , Gothic mik, mīs , Latin mē , Greek eme , Sanskrit mam ), numbers (e.g. one , two , three , cf. Dutch een , twee , drie , Gothic ains , twai , threis (þreis) , Latin ūnus, duo, trēs , Greek oinos "ace (on dice)", duo, treis ), common family relationships such as mother, father, brother, sister etc. (cf. Dutch moeder , Greek meter , Latin mater , Sanskrit matṛ ; mother ), names of many animals (cf. German Maus , Dutch muis , Sanskrit mus , Greek mus , Latin mūs ; mouse ), and many common verbs (cf. Old High German knājan , Old Norse kná , Greek gignōmi , Latin gnoscere , Hittite kanes ; to know ). 
 Germanic words (generally words of Old English or to a lesser extent Old Norse origin) tend to be shorter than Latinate words, and are more common in ordinary speech, and include nearly all the basic pronouns, prepositions, conjunctions, modal verbs etc. that form the basis of English syntax and grammar. The shortness of the words is generally due to syncope in Middle English (e.g. OldEng hēafod &gt; ModEng head , OldEng sāwol &gt; ModEng soul ) and to the loss of final syllables due to stress (e.g. OldEng gamen &gt; ModEng game , OldEng ǣrende &gt; ModEng errand ), not because Germanic words are inherently shorter than Latinate words (the lengthier, higher-register words of Old English were largely forgotten following the subjugation of English after the Norman Conquest, and most of the Old English lexis devoted to literature, the arts, and sciences ceased to be productive when it fell into disuse. Only the shorter, more direct, words of Old English tended to pass into the Modern language.) 
 Consequently, those words which tend to be regarded as elegant or educated in Modern English are usually Latinate. However, the excessive use of Latinate words is considered at times to be either pretentious or an attempt to obfuscate an issue. George Orwell 's essay " Politics and the English Language ", considered an important scrutinisation of the English language, is critical of this, as well as other perceived misuses of the language. 
 An English speaker is in many cases able to choose between Germanic and Latinate synonyms: come or arrive ; sight or vision ; freedom or liberty . In some cases, there is a choice between a Germanic derived word ( oversee ), a Latin derived word ( supervise ), and a French word derived from the same Latin word ( survey ); or even Germanic words derived from Norman French (e.g., warranty ) and Parisian French ( guarantee ), and even choices involving multiple Germanic and Latinate sources are possible: sickness (Old English), ill (Old Norse), infirmity (French), affliction (Latin). Such synonyms harbour a variety of different meanings and nuances. Yet the ability to choose between multiple synonyms is not a consequence of French and Latin influence, as this same richness existed in English prior to the extensive borrowing of French and Latin terms. Old English was extremely resourceful in its ability to express synonyms and shades of meaning on its own, in many respects rivaling or exceeding that of Modern English (synonyms numbering in the thirties for certain concepts were not uncommon). 
 Take for instance the various ways to express the word "astronomer" or "astrologer" in Old English: tunglere, tungolcræftiga, tungolwītega, tīdymbwlātend, tīdscēawere .  In Modern English, however, the roles of such synonyms have largely been replaced by equivalents taken from Latin, French, and Greek, as English has taken the position of a diminished reliance upon native elements and resources for the creation of new words and terminologies. Familiarity with the etymology of groups of synonyms can give English speakers greater control over their linguistic register . See: List of Germanic and Latinate equivalents in English , Doublet (linguistics) . 
 A commonly noted area where Germanic and French-derived words coexist is that of domestic or game animals and the meats produced from them. The nouns for meats are often different from, and unrelated to, those for the corresponding animals, the animal commonly having a Germanic name and the meat having a French-derived one. Examples include: deer and venison ; cow and beef ; swine / pig and pork ; and sheep / lamb and mutton . This is assumed to be a result of the aftermath of the Norman conquest of England , where an Anglo-Norman-speaking elite were the consumers of the meat, produced by lower classes, which happened to be largely Anglo-Saxon, although a similar duality can also be seen in other languages like French, which did not undergo such linguistic upheaval (e.g. boeuf "beef" vs. vache "cow"). With the exception of beef and pork , the distinction today is gradually becoming less and less pronounced ( venison is commonly referred to simply as deer meat , mutton is lamb , and chicken is both the animal and the meat over the more traditional term poultry . Use of the term mutton , however, remains, especially when referring to the meat of an older sheep, distinct from lamb ; and poultry remains when referring to the meat of birds and fowls in general.) 
 There are Latinate words that are used in everyday speech. These words no longer appear Latinate and oftentimes have no Germanic equivalents. For instance, the words mountain , valley , river , aunt , uncle , move , use , and push are Latinate. Likewise, the inverse can occur: acknowledge , meaningful , understanding , mindful , lavish , behaviour , forbearance , behoove , forestall , allay , rhyme , starvation , embodiment come from Anglo-Saxon, and allegiance , abandonment , debutant , feudalism , seizure , guarantee , disregard , wardrobe , disenfranchise , disarray , bandolier , bourgeoisie , debauchery , performance , furniture , gallantry are of Germanic origin, usually through the Germanic element in French, so it is oftentimes impossible to know the origin of a word based on its register. 
 English easily accepts technical terms into common usage and often imports new words and phrases. Examples of this phenomenon include contemporary words such as cookie , Internet and URL (technical terms), as well as genre , über , lingua franca and amigo (imported words/phrases from French, German, Italian, and Spanish, respectively). In addition, slang often provides new meanings for old words and phrases. In fact, this fluidity is so pronounced that a distinction often needs to be made between formal forms of English and contemporary usage. 
 See also: sociolinguistics 
 Number of words in English 
 The vocabulary of English is undoubtedly very large, but assigning a specific number to its size is more a matter of definition than of calculation&#160;– and there is no official source to define accepted English words and spellings in the way that the French Académie française and similar bodies do for other languages. 
 Archaic, dialectal, and regional words might or might not be widely considered as "English", and neologisms are continually coined in medicine, science, technology and other fields, along with new slang and adopted foreign words. Some of these new words enter wide usage while others remain restricted to small circles. 
 The General Explanations at the beginning of the Oxford English Dictionary states: 
 
 The Vocabulary of a widely diffused and highly cultivated living language is not a fixed quantity circumscribed by definite limits... there is absolutely no defining line in any direction: the circle of the English language has a well-defined centre but no discernible circumference. 
 
 The current FAQ for the OED further states: 
 
 How many words are there in the English language? There is no single sensible answer to this question. It's impossible to count the number of words in a language, because it's so hard to decide what actually counts as a word.  
 
 The Oxford English Dictionary, 2nd edition (OED2) includes over 600,000 definitions, following a rather inclusive policy: 
 
 It embraces not only the standard language of literature and conversation, whether current at the moment, or obsolete, or archaic, but also the main technical vocabulary, and a large measure of dialectal usage and slang (Supplement to the OED, 1933).  
 
 The editors of Webster's Third New International Dictionary, Unabridged include 475,000 main headwords, but in their preface they estimate the true number to be much higher. Comparisons of the vocabulary size of English to that of other languages are generally not taken very seriously by linguists and lexicographers. Besides the fact that dictionaries will vary in their policies for including and counting entries,  
 In December 2010 a joint Harvard/Google study found the language to contain 1,022,000 words and to expand at the rate of 8,500 words per year.  
 Word origins 
 Main article: Lists of English loanwords by country or language of origin 
 One of the consequences of the French influence is that the vocabulary of English is, to a certain extent, divided between those words that are Germanic (mostly West Germanic, with a smaller influence from the North Germanic branch) and those that are "Latinate" (derived directly from Latin , or through Norman French or other Romance languages). The situation is further compounded, as French, particularly Old French and Anglo-French , were also contributors in English of significant numbers of Germanic words, mostly from the Frankish element in French (see List of English Latinates of Germanic origin ). 
 The majority (estimates range from roughly 50%  
 
 Source of the most frequent 7,476 English words 
 
 
 1st 100 
 1st 1,000 
 2nd 1,000 
 Subsequent 
 
 
 Germanic 
 97% 
 57% 
 39% 
 36% 
 
 
 Italic 
 3% 
 36% 
 51% 
 51% 
 
 
 Hellenic 
 0 
 4% 
 4% 
 7% 
 
 
 Others 
 0 
 3% 
 6% 
 6% 
 
 
 Source: Nation 2001 , p.&#160;265 
 
 
 Numerous sets of statistics have been proposed to demonstrate the proportionate origins of English vocabulary. None, as yet, is considered definitive by most linguists. 
 A computerised survey of about 80,000 words in the old Shorter Oxford Dictionary (3rd ed.) was published in Ordered Profusion by Thomas Finkenstaedt and Dieter Wolff (1973)  that estimated the origin of English words as follows: 
 
 
 
  
Influences in English vocabulary 
 
 
 
 Langue d'oïl , including French and Old Norman : 28.3% 
 Latin, including modern scientific and technical Latin: 28.24% 
 Germanic languages (including words directly inherited from Old English ; does not include Germanic words coming from the Germanic element in French, Latin or other Romance languages): 25% 
 Greek: 5.32% 
 No etymology given: 4.03% 
 Derived from proper names: 3.28% 
 All other languages: less than 1% 
 
 A survey by Joseph M. Williams in Origins of the English Language of 10,000 words taken from several thousand business letters gave this set of statistics:  
 
 French (langue d'oïl): 41% 
 "Native" English: 33% 
 Latin: 15% 
 Old Norse: 2% 
 Dutch: 1% 
 Other: 10% 
 
 Words of Old Norse origin 
 Main article: List of English words of Old Norse origin 
 Many words of Old Norse origin have entered the English language, primarily from the Viking colonisation of eastern and northern England between 800–1000 during the Danelaw . These include common words such as anger, awe, bag, big, birth, blunder, both, cake, call, cast, cosy, cross, cut, die, dirt, drag, drown, egg, fellow, flat, flounder, gain, get, gift, give, guess, guest, gust, hug, husband, ill, kid, law, leg, lift, likely, link, loan, loose, low, mistake, odd, race (running), raise, root, rotten, same, scale, scare, score, seat, seem, sister, skill, skin, skirt, skull, sky, stain, steak, sway, take, though, thrive, Thursday, tight, till (until), trust, ugly, want, weak, window, wing, wrong , the pronoun they (and its forms), and even the verb are (the present plural form of to be ) through a merger of Old English and Old Norse cognates.  
 Words of French origin 
 Main article: List of English words of French origin 
 A large portion of English vocabulary is of French or Langues d'oïl origin, and was transmitted to English via the Anglo-Norman language spoken by the upper classes in England in the centuries following the Norman Conquest . Words of Norman French origin include competition , mountain , art , table , publicity , role , pattern , joust , choice , and force . As a result of the length of time they have been in use in English, these words have been anglicised to fit English rules of phonology , pronunciation and spelling. 
 Some French words were adopted during the 17th to 19th centuries, when French was the dominant language of Western international politics and trade. These words can normally be distinguished because they retain French rules for pronunciation and spelling, including diacritics , are often phrases rather than single words, and are sometimes written in italics . Examples include police , routine , machine , façade , table d'hôte and affaire de cœur . These words and phrases retain their French spelling and pronunciation because historically their French origin was emphasised to denote the speaker as educated or well-travelled at a time when education and travelling was still restricted to the middle and upper classes, and so their use implied a higher social status in the user. (See also: French phrases used by English speakers ) . 
 Words of Dutch and Low German origin 
 Main article: List of English words of Dutch origin 
 Many words describing the navy, types of ships, and other objects or activities on the water are of Dutch origin. Yacht , skipper , cruiser , flag , freight , furlough , breeze , hoist , iceberg , boom , duck ("fabric, cloth"), and maelstrom are examples. Other words pertain to art and daily life: easel , etch , slim , staple (Middle Dutch stapel "market"), slip (Middle Dutch slippen ), landscape , cookie , curl , shock , aloof , boss , brawl ( brallen "to boast"), smack ( smakken "to hurl down"), shudder , scum , peg , coleslaw , waffle , dope ( doop "dipping sauce"), slender (Old Dutch slinder ), slight , gas , pump . Dutch has also contributed to English slang, e.g. spook , and the now obsolete snyder (tailor) and stiver (small coin). 
 Words from Low German include bluster, cower, dollar, drum, geek, grab, lazy, mate, monkey, mud, ogle, orlop, paltry, poll, poodle, prong, scurvy, smug, smuggle, trade . 
 Writing system 
 Main articles: English alphabet , English braille , and English orthography 
 Since around the 9th century, English has been written in the Latin script , which replaced Anglo-Saxon runes . The modern English alphabet contains 26 letters of the Latin script: a , b , c , d , e , f , g , h , i , j , k , l , m , n , o , p , q , r , s , t , u , v , w , x , y , z (which also have majuscule , capital or uppercase forms: A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, U, V, W, X, Y, Z). Other symbols used in writing English include the ligatures , æ and œ (though these are no longer common). There is also some usage of diacritics , mainly in foreign loanwords (like the acute accent in café and exposé ), and in the occasional use of a diaeresis to indicate that two vowels are pronounced separately (as in naïve , Zoë ). For more information see English terms with diacritical marks . 
 The spelling system, or orthography , of English is multilayered, with elements of French, Latin and Greek spelling on top of the native Germanic system; further complications have arisen through sound changes with which the orthography has not kept pace. This means that, compared with many other languages, English spelling is not a reliable indicator of pronunciation and vice versa (it is not, generally speaking, a phonemic orthography ). 
 Though letters and sounds may not correspond in isolation, spelling rules that take into account syllable structure, phonetics, and accents are 75% or more reliable.  
 As regards the consonants , the correspondence between spelling and pronunciation is fairly regular. The letters b, d, f, h, j, k, l, m, n, p, r, s, t, v, w, z represent, respectively, the phonemes /b/ , /d/ , /f/ , /h/ , /dʒ/ , /k/ , /l/ , /m/ , /n/ , /p/ , /r/ , /s/ , /t/ , /v/ , /w/ , /z/ (as tabulated in the Consonants section above). The letters c and g normally represent /k/ and /ɡ/ , but there is also a soft c pronounced /s/ , and a soft g pronounced /dʒ/ . Some sounds are represented by digraphs : ch for /tʃ/ , sh for /ʃ/ , th for /θ/ or /ð/ , ng for /ŋ/ (also ph is pronounced /f/ in Greek-derived words). Doubled consonant letters (and the combination ck ) are generally pronounced as single consonants, and qu and x are pronounced as the sequences /kw/ and /ks/ . The letter y , when used as a consonant, represents /j/ . However this set of rules is not applicable without exception; many words have silent consonants or other cases of irregular pronunciation.  
 With the vowels , however, correspondences between spelling and pronunciation are even more irregular. As can be seen under Vowels above, there are many more vowel phonemes in English than there are vowel letters ( a , e , i , o , u , y ). This means that diphthongs and other long vowels often need to be indicated by combinations of letters (like the oa in boat and the ay in stay ), or using a silent e or similar device (as in note and cake ). Even these devices are not used consistently, so consequently vowel pronunciation remains the main source of irregularity in English orthography.  
 See also 
 
 
 
  
 Language portal 
 
 
  
 Writing portal 
 
 
  
 England portal 
 
 
  
 Commonwealth realms portal 
 
 
  
 British Empire portal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Book: English language 
 
 
 
 
 
 Changes to Old English vocabulary 
 Comparison of American and British English 
 English for academic purposes 
 English language in Europe 
 English-based creoles 
 Language Report 
 Lists of English words 
 Teaching English as a foreign language 
 European Society for the Study of English 
 Wikipedia:Manual of style#National varieties of English 
 
 References 
 
 
 ^  "English Adjective" . Oxfordadvancedlearnersdictionary.com . Retrieved 2013-04-20 . &#160; 
 ^  "Världens 100 största språk 2010"  . Nationalencyklopedin . 2010 . Retrieved 12 February 2014 . &#160; (Swedish) 
 ^  David Crystal, 2003, English as a Global Language , p. 68 
 ^  Mydans, Seth (14 May 2007) "Across cultures, English is the word" New York Times . Retrieved 21 September 2011 
 ^  a   b   "Ethnologue, 1999" . Archived from the original on 29 April 1999 . Retrieved 31 October 2010 . &#160; 
 ^  Ammon , pp.&#160;2245–2247. 
 ^  Schneider , p.&#160;1. 
 ^  Mazrui , p.&#160;21. 
 ^  Howatt , pp.&#160;127–133. 
 ^  Hjarvard, Stig (2004) "The globalization of language: How the media contribute to the spread of English and the emergence of medialects" Trans. Charly Hultén. Nordicom Review . Retrieved 30 December 2014. 
 ^  Crystal , pp.&#160;87–89. 
 ^  Wardhaugh , p.&#160;60. 
 ^  "English&#160;– Definition and More from the Free Merriam-Webster Dictionary" . Merriam-webster.com. 25 April 2007 . Retrieved 4 November 2012 . &#160; 
 ^  "Words on the brain: from 1&#160;million years ago?" . History of language . Retrieved 5 September 2010 . &#160; 
 ^  Baugh, Albert C. and Cable, Thomas (1978). "Latin Influences on Old English" . An excerpt from Foreign Influences on Old English . Retrieved 5 September 2010 . &#160; 
 ^  a   b  Daniel Weissbort (2006). "Translation: theory and practice&#160;: a historical reader". p.100. Oxford University Press, 2006 
 ^  "How many words are there in the English Language?" . Oxforddictionaries.com. &#160; 
 ^  "Vista Worldwide Language Statistics" . Vistawide.com . Retrieved 31 October 2010 . &#160; 
 ^  Harper, Douglas. "english" . Online Etymology Dictionary . &#160; 
 ^  Smith, Ross (2005). "Global English: gift or curse?". English Today 21 (2): 56. doi : 10.1017/S0266078405002075 . &#160; 
 ^  a   b   c   d   David Graddol (1997). "The Future of English?" (PDF). The British Council . Retrieved 15 April 2007 . &#160; 
 ^  "IMO Standard Marine Communication Phrases" . International Maritime Organization . Retrieved 2 June 2011 . &#160;  
 ^  "FAQ – Language proficiency requirements for licence holders – In which languages does a licence holder need to demonstrate proficiency?" . International Civil Aviation Organization – Air Navigation Bureau . Retrieved 2 June 2011 . &#160; 
 ^  "The triumph of English" . The Economist. 20 December 2001 . Retrieved 26 March 2007 . &#160; (subscription required) 
 ^  "Lecture 7: World-Wide English" . E HistLing . Retrieved 26 March 2007 . &#160; 
 ^  Graphics: English replacing German as language of Science Nobel Prize winners . From J. Schmidhuber (2010), Evolution of National Nobel Prize Shares in the 20th Century at arXiv:1009.2634v1 
 ^  "UN official languages" . Un.org . Retrieved 2013-04-20 . &#160; 
 ^  Crystal, David (2002). Language Death . Cambridge University Press . doi : 10.2277/0521012716 . ISBN &#160; 0-521-01271-6 . &#160; 
 ^  Cheshire, Jenny (1991). English Around The World: Sociolinguistic Perspectives . Cambridge University Press . doi : 10.2277/0521395658 . ISBN &#160; 0-521-39565-8 . &#160; 
 ^  Blench, R.; Spriggs, Matthew (1999). Archaeology and Language: Correlating Archaeological and Linguistic Hypotheses . Routledge. pp.&#160;285–286. ISBN &#160; 978-0-415-11761-6 . &#160; 
 ^  "The Roman epoch in Britain lasted for 367 years" , Information Britain website 
 ^  "Anglik English language resource" . Anglik.net . Retrieved 21 April 2010 . &#160; 
 ^  "Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England | Christian Classics Ethereal Library" . Ccel.org. 1 June 2005 . Retrieved 2 January 2010 . &#160; 
 ^  Bosworth, Joseph ; Toller, T. Northcote. "Engla land" . An Anglo-Saxon Dictionary (Online) . Prague: Charles University . &#160; Cite uses deprecated parameters ( help ) 
 ^  Bosworth, Joseph ; Toller, T. Northcote. "Englisc" . An Anglo-Saxon Dictionary (Online) . Prague: Charles University . &#160; Cite uses deprecated parameters ( help ) 
 ^  Collingwood, R. G. ; et al (1936). "The English Settlements. The Sources for the period: Angles, Saxons, and Jutes on the Continent". Roman Britain and English Settlements . Oxford, England: Clarendon. pp.&#160;325 et&#160;sec. ISBN &#160; 0-8196-1160-3 . &#160; Cite uses deprecated parameters ( help ) 
 ^  "Linguistics Research Center Texas University" . Utexas.edu. 20 February 2009 . Retrieved 21 April 2010 . &#160; 
 ^  "The Germanic Invasions of Western Europe, Calgary University" . Ucalgary.ca . Retrieved 21 April 2010 . &#160; 
 ^  Graddol, David; Leith, Dick and Swann, Joan (1996) English: History, Diversity and Change , New York: Routledge, p. 101, ISBN 0415131189 . 
 ^  Cercignani, Fausto (1981) Shakespeare's Works and Elizabethan Pronunciation , Oxford, Clarendon Press. 
 ^  Baugh , p. 336. 
 ^  Curtis, Andy (2006) Color, Race, And English Language Teaching: Shades of Meaning , Routledge, p. 192, ISBN 0805856609 . 
 ^  "CIA World Factbook, Field Listing&#160;– Languages (World)" . Cia.gov . Retrieved 2013-04-20 . &#160; 
 ^  Languages of the World (Charts) , Comrie (1998), Weber (1997), and the Summer Institute for Linguistics (SIL) 1999 Ethnologue Survey. Available at The World's Most Widely Spoken Languages 
 ^  Mair, Victor H. (1991). "What Is a Chinese "Dialect/Topolect"? Reflections on Some Key Sino-English Linguistic Terms" (PDF). Sino-Platonic Papers . &#160; 
 ^  " English Language " . Columbia University Press. 2005 . Retrieved 26 March 2007 . &#160; 
 ^  20,000 ESL Teaching Jobs Oxford Seminars. Retrieved 17 April 2012 
 ^  Crystal, David (2003). English as a Global Language (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. p.&#160;69. ISBN &#160; 978-0-521-53032-3 . &#160; , cited in Power, Carla (7 March 2005). "Not the Queen's English" . Newsweek . &#160; 
 ^  "U.S. Census Bureau, Statistical Abstract of the United States: 2003, Section 1 Population" (PDF). U.S. Census Bureau. &#160; Table 47 gives the figure of 214,809,000 for those five years old and over who speak exclusively English at home. Based on the American Community Survey, these results exclude those living communally (such as college dormitories, institutions, and group homes), and by definition exclude native English speakers who speak more than one language at home. 
 ^  a   b  Crystal, David (1995). " The Cambridge Encyclopedia of the English Language " (2nd ed.). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. &#160; 
 ^  Population by mother tongue and age groups, 2006 counts, for Canada, provinces and territories–20% sample data , Census 2006, Statistics Canada . 
 ^  Census Data from Australian Bureau of Statistics Main Language Spoken at Home. The figure is the number of people who only speak English at home. 
 ^  Figures are for speakers of Nigerian Pidgin , an English-based pidgin or creole. Ihemere gives a range of roughly 3 to 5&#160;million native speakers; the midpoint of the range is used in the table. Ihemere, Kelechukwu Uchechukwu (2006). "A Basic Description and Analytic Treatment of Noun Clauses in Nigerian Pidgin" . Nordic Journal of African Studies 15 (3): 296–313. &#160; 
 ^  Census in Brief , page 15 (Table 2.5), 2001 Census, Statistics South Africa 
 ^  "About people, Language spoken" . Statistics New Zealand . 2006 census. Archived from the original on 2009-10-15 . Retrieved 28 September 2009 . &#160; Check date values in: |date= ( help ) (links to Microsoft Excel files) 
 ^  Crystal, David (2004-11-19) Subcontinent Raises Its Voice , Guardian Weekly . 
 ^  Zhao, Yong and Campbell, Keith P. (1995). "English in China". World Englishes 14 (3): 377–390. doi : 10.1111/j.1467-971X.1995.tb00080.x . "Hong Kong contributes an additional 2.5&#160;million speakers (1996 by-census)" &#160; 
 ^  "Table C-17: Population by Bilingualism and trilingualism, 2001 Census of India" (PDF) . Retrieved 2013-04-20 . &#160; 
 ^  Tropf, Herbert S. (2004-01-23). India and its Languages . Siemens AG, Munich. 
 ^  For the distinction between "English Speakers" and "English Users", see: TESOL-India (Teachers of English to Speakers of Other Languages). Their article explains the difference between the 350&#160;million number mentioned in a previous version of this Wikipedia article and a more plausible 90&#160;million number: 
 
 Wikipedia's India estimate of 350&#160;million includes two categories – "English Speakers" and "English Users". The distinction between the Speakers and Users is that Users only know how to read English words while Speakers know how to read English, understand spoken English as well as form their own sentences to converse in English. The distinction becomes clear when you consider the China numbers. China has over 200~350&#160;million users that can read English words but, as anyone can see on the streets of China, only handful of million who are English speakers. 
 
 
 ^  a   b   c   "Ethnologue report for Philippines" . Ethnologue.com . Retrieved 2 January 2010 . &#160; 
 ^  González, Andrew (1998). "The Language Planning Situation in the Philippines" . Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development 19 (5&amp;6): 487–525. doi : 10.1080/01434639808666365 . &#160; 
 ^  "Australian Bureau of Statistics" . Censusdata.abs.gov.au . Retrieved 21 April 2010 . &#160; 
 ^  Census 2011: Census in brief . Pretoria: Statistics South Africa. 2012. ISBN &#160; 9780621413885 . &#160; 
 ^  "Census of Population 2011: Preliminary Results" (PDF). 30 June 2011. p. 1. Retrieved 29 August 2010. 
 ^  "2006 Census Data – QuickStats About Culture and Identity – Tables" . Statistics New Zealand . Retrieved 14 August 2012 . &#160; 
 ^  Nancy Morris (1995). Puerto Rico: Culture, Politics, and Identity . Praeger/Greenwood. p.&#160;62. ISBN &#160; 0-275-95228-2 . &#160; 
 ^  "U.S. English, Inc" . Us-english.org . Retrieved 21 April 2010 . &#160; 
 ^  "ICAO Promotes Aviation Safety by Endorsing English Language Testing" . International Civil Aviation Organization. 13 October 2011. &#160; 
 ^  "IMO Standard Marine Communication Phrases" . International Maritime Organization. Archived from the original on 27 December 2003. &#160; 
 ^  "Europeans and languages" (PDF). pp.&#160;21, 69 . Retrieved 21 April 2010 . &#160; 
 ^  a   b   "Net.lang: towards the multilingual cyberspace" . Net-lang.net . Retrieved 2013-07-10 . &#160; 
 ^  David Crystal (2000) Language Death, Preface; viii, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 
 ^  a   b  Jambor, Paul Z. (April 2007). "English Language Imperialism: Points of View" . Journal of English as an International Language 2 : 103–123. &#160; 
 ^  Aitken, A. J. and McArthur, T. Eds. (1979) Languages of Scotland . Edinburgh,Chambers. p. 87, ISBN 0550202617 . 
 ^  Second Report submitted by the United Kingdom pursuant to article 25, paragraph 1 of the framework convention for the protection of national minorities  
 ^  Trudgill, Peter (2002) The Dialects of England 2nd edition, p. 125, Blackwell, Oxford, ISBN 0631218149 . 
 ^  Quirk, R. (1974). The linguist and the English language. London: Arnold. p. 138. 
 ^  Phillips, J. (1973). "Syntax and vocabulary of mothers' speech to young children: Age and sex comparisons" . Child Development 44 : 182–185. doi : 10.2307/1127699 . JSTOR &#160; 1127699 . &#160; 
 ^  Foley, W. A. and Van Valin, R. D. Jr. (1984). Functional syntax and universal grammar. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0521269040 . 
 ^  a   b  Ninio, A. (2011). Syntactic development, its input and output. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Introduction , ISBN 0199565961 . 
 ^  Anglin, J. M.; Miller, George A.; Wakefield, Pamela C. (1993). "Vocabulary development: A morphological analysis". Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development 58 (10): 238. doi : 10.2307/1166112 . JSTOR &#160; 1166112 . &#160; 
 ^  Clark, E. V. (1993). The lexicon in acquisition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0521484642 . 
 ^  "Official page of ASD Simplified Technical English Maintenance Group (STEMG)" . &#160; 
 ^  Cox, Felicity (2006). "Australian English Pronunciation into the 21st century" (PDF). Prospect 21 : 3–21. Archived from the original on 24 July 2007 . Retrieved 22 July 2007 . &#160; 
 ^  Gimson, ed. A. Cruttenden (2008). Pronunciation of English . Hodder. pp.&#160;112–3. &#160; 
 ^  Oxford English Dictionary, see entry "civilisation" 
 ^  Oxford English Dictionary, see entry "contract" 
 ^  For the processes and triggers of English vocabulary changes cf. English and General Historical Lexicology (by Joachim Grzega and Marion Schöner) 
 ^  Baugh , p. 50. 
 ^  "How many words are there in the English language?" . Oxford Dictionaries Online . Oxford University Press . Retrieved 17 September 2010 . &#160; 
 ^  It went on to clarify, 
 
 Hence we exclude all words that had become obsolete by 1150 ... Dialectal words and forms which occur since 1500 are not admitted, except when they continue the history of the word or sense once in general use, illustrate the history of a word, or have themselves a certain literary currency. 
 
 
 ^  Sheidlower, Jesse (10 April 2006). "How many words are there in English?" . Retrieved 17 September 2010 . &#160; 
 ^  Liberman, Mark (1 June 2010). "Laden on word counting" . Language Log . Retrieved 17 September 2010 . &#160; 
 ^  Liberman, Mark (28 December 2006). "An apology to our readers" . Language Log . Retrieved 17 September 2010 . &#160; 
 ^  Pullum, Geoffrey K. (8 December 2006). "Vocabulary size and penis length" . Language Log . Retrieved 17 September 2010 . &#160; 
 ^  English language has doubled in size in the last century , Richard Alleyne, Science Correspondent, The Telegraph , 16 December 2010 
 ^  Kister, Ken (1992-06-15). "Dictionaries defined". Library Journal 117 (11): 43, 4p, 2bw. &#160; 
 ^  Nation 2001 , p.&#160;265 
 ^  "Old English Online" . Utexas.edu. 20 February 2009 . Retrieved 21 April 2010 . &#160; 
 ^  "From Arabic to English" , www.america.gov 
 ^  Finkenstaedt, Thomas; Dieter Wolff (1973). Ordered profusion; studies in dictionaries and the English lexicon . C. Winter. ISBN &#160; 3-533-02253-6 . &#160; Cite uses deprecated parameters ( help ) 
 ^  Joseph M. Williams (1975,1986). Origins of the English Language. A social and linguistic history . Free Press. p.&#160;  . ASIN &#160; 0029344700 . &#160; Check date values in: |date= ( help ) 
 ^  "Are" . Online Etymology Dictionary . Retrieved 27 October 2010 . &#160; 
 ^  Abbott, M. (2000). "Identifying reliable generalisations for spelling words: The importance of multilevel analysis". The Elementary School Journal 101 (2): 233–245. doi : 10.1086/499666 . JSTOR &#160; 1002344 . &#160; 
 ^  Moats, L. M. (2001). Speech to print: Language essentials for teachers. Baltimore, MD: Paul H. Brookes Company, ISBN 1598570501 . 
 ^  McGuinness, Diane (1997) Why Our Children Can't Read , New York: Touchstone, pp. 156–169, ISBN 0684853566 . 
 ^  Ziegler, J. C., &amp; Goswami, U. (2005). "Reading acquisition, developmental dyslexia, and skilled reading across languages: A psycholinguistic grain size theory". Psychological bulletin 131 (1): 3–29. doi : 10.1037/0033-2909.131.1.3 . PMID &#160; 15631549 . &#160; 
 ^  Seymour, Philip H K, University of Dundee (2001). "Media centre" . Spelling Society . Retrieved 21 April 2010 . &#160; 
 
 
 Bibliography 
 
 
 Ammon, Ulrich (2006). Sociolinguistics: An International Handbook of the Science of Language and Society . Walter de Gruyter. ISBN &#160; 3-11-018418-4 . &#160; 
 Baugh, Albert C.; Thomas Cable (2002). A History of the English Language (5th ed.). Routledge. ISBN &#160; 0-415-28099-0 . &#160; Cite uses deprecated parameters ( help ) 
 Bragg, Melvyn (2004). The Adventure of English : The Biography of a Language . Arcade Publishing. ISBN &#160; 1-55970-710-0 . &#160; 
 Crystal, David (1997). English as a Global Language . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN &#160; 0-521-53032-6 . &#160; 
 Crystal, David (2003). The Cambridge Encyclopedia of the English Language (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN &#160; 0-521-53033-4 . &#160; 
 Crystal, David (2004). The Stories of English . Allen Lane. ISBN &#160; 0-7139-9752-4 . &#160; 
 Dunton-Downer, Leslie (2010). The English Is Coming!: How One Language Is Sweeping the World . New York: Touchstone Books. ISBN &#160; 978-1-4391-7665-8 . &#160; 
 Halliday, MAK (1994). An Introduction to Functional Grammar (2nd ed.). London: Edward Arnold. ISBN &#160; 0-340-55782-6 . &#160; 
 Hayford, Harrison; Howard P. Vincent (1954). Reader and Writer . Houghton Mifflin Company. &#160; Cite uses deprecated parameters ( help ) "Internet Archive: Free Download: Reader And Writer" . Archive.org. 10 March 2001 . Retrieved 2 January 2010 . &#160; 
 Howatt, Anthony (2004). A History of English Language Teaching . Oxford University Press. ISBN &#160; 0-19-442185-6 . &#160; 
 Kenyon, John Samuel and Knott, Thomas Albert, A Pronouncing Dictionary of American English , G &amp; C Merriam Company, Springfield, Mass, USA,1953. 
 Mazrui, Alamin (1998). The Power of Babel: Language &amp; Governance in the African Experience . University of Chicago Press. ISBN &#160; 0-85255-807-4 . &#160; 
 McArthur, T. (ed.) (1992). The Oxford Companion to the English Language . Oxford University Press. ISBN &#160; 0-19-214183-X . &#160; 
 McCrum, Robert; Robert MacNeil, William Cran (1986). The Story of English (1st ed.). New York: Viking. ISBN &#160; 0-670-80467-3 . &#160; Cite uses deprecated parameters ( help ) 
 Nation, I.S.P. (2001). Learning Vocabulary in Another Language . Cambridge University Press. p.&#160;477. ISBN &#160; 0-521-80498-1 . &#160; 
 Plotkin, Vulf (2006). The Language System of English . BrownWalker Press. ISBN &#160; 1-58112-993-9 . &#160; 
 Robinson, Orrin (1992). Old English and Its Closest Relatives . Stanford Univ. Press. ISBN &#160; 0-8047-2221-8 . &#160; 
 Schneider, Edgar (2007). Postcolonial English: Varieties Around the World . Cambridge University Press. ISBN &#160; 0-521-83140-7 . &#160; 
 Wardhaugh, Ronald (2006). An Introduction to Sociolinguistics . Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN &#160; 1-4051-3559-X . &#160; 
 
 
 Further reading 
 
 Partridge, A. C. Tudor to Augustan English: a Study in Syntax and Style, from Caxton to Johnson , in series, The Language Library . London: A. Deutsch, 1969. 242 p. SBN 233-96092-9 
 
 External links 
 
 
 Find more about English language at Wikipedia's sister projects 
 
 
  
 Definitions and translations from Wiktionary 
 
 
  
 Media from Commons 
 
 
  
 Quotations from Wikiquote 
 
 
  
 Textbooks from Wikibooks 
 
 
  
 Learning resources from Wikiversity 
 
 
  
 Database entry Q1860 on Wikidata 
 
 
 
 Accents of English from Around the World (University of Edinburgh) - hear and compare how the same 110 words are pronounced in 50 English accents from around the world 
 
 
 Dictionaries 
 
 
 Collection of English bilingual dictionaries 
 dict.org 
 English language word roots, prefixes and suffixes (affixes) dictionary 
 Merriam-Webster's online dictionary 
 Macquarie Dictionary Online 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 &#160; 
 Articles related to the English language 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 &#160; 
 Linguistics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 t 
 e 
 
 
 Description of the English language 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grammar 
 Phonology 
 Stress and reduced vowels 
 Orthography 
 Alphabet 
 Braille 
 Dialects 
 Language history 
 Phonological history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 t 
 e 
 
 
 History of the English language 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Proto-English 
 Old English 
 Anglo-Norman language 
 Middle English 
 Early Modern English 
 Modern English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 &#160; 
 Phonological history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vowels 
 
 
 
 Great Vowel Shift 
 short A 
 low back vowels 
 high back vowels 
 high front vowels 
 diphthongs 
 changes before historic l 
 changes before historic r 
 trisyllabic laxing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Consonants 
 
 
 
 rhoticity 
 flapping 
 l-vocalization 
 consonant clusters 
 wh 
 fricatives and affricates 
 th 
 th-alveolarization 
 th-fronting 
 ð (eth) 
 þ (thorn) 
 th-debuccalization 
 th-stopping 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 t 
 e 
 
 
 Dialects and accents of Modern English by continent 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Europe 
 
 
 
 
 
 Great Britain 
 
 
 
 
 Black Country 
 Brummie 
 Cheshire 
 Cockney 
 Cornish 
 Cumbrian 
 East Anglian 
 East Midlands 
 Essex 
 Estuary 
 Geordie 
 Kentish 
 Lancashire 
 Mackem 
 Manchester 
 Mockney 
 Mummerset (mocking) 
 Multicultural London 
 Norfolk 
 Northern 
 Pitmatic 
 Potteries 
 Received Pronunciation 
 Scottish ( Highland ) 
 Scouse 
 Southern 
 Suffolk 
 Sussex 
 West Midlands 
 Welsh ( Cardiff ) 
 West Country 
 Yorkshire 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ireland 
 
 
 
 
 Cork 
 Dublin 
 Mid-Ulster 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Other 
 
 
 
 
 Gibraltarian 
 Guernsey 
 Jersey 
 Manx 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 North America 
 
 
 
 
 
 United States 
 
 
 
 
 African American Vernacular 
 Appalachian 
 Baltimorese 
 Boston 
 Cajun 
 California 
 Central Pennsylvania 
 Chicano 
 English in Puerto Rico 
 General American 
 Hawai'i 
 Hudson Valley 
 Inland Northern American 
 Midland 
 New England 
 New Jersey 
 New York City 
 New York Latino English 
 North–Central American 
 Northeast Pennsylvania 
 Ozark 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Pennsylvania Dutch 
 Philadelphia 
 Pittsburgh 
 Southern American 
 Texan 
 Tidewater 
 Vermont 
 Western 
 Yat 
 Yeshivish 
 Yooper 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Canada 
 
 
 
 
 Aboriginal 
 Cape Breton 
 Lunenburg 
 Maritimer 
 Newfoundland 
 Ottawa Valley Twang 
 Pacific Northwest 
 Quebec 
 West-Central Canadian 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Other 
 
 
 
 
 Bahamian 
 Barbadian 
 Belizean 
 Bermudian 
 Caribbean 
 Jamaican 
 Trinidadian 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Elsewhere 
 
 
 
 
 
 Australia 
and Oceania 
 
 
 
 
 Australian 
 
 Australian Aboriginal 
 Broad Australian 
 South Australian 
 Torres Strait 
 Variation in Australian English 
 Western Australian 
 
 
 Fijian English 
 New Zealand 
 Palauan 
 Solomon Islands 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 South America 
 
 
 
 
 Falkland Islands 
 Guyanese 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Africa 
 
 
 
 
 Cameroon 
 Liberian 
 Malawian 
 Namibian 
 Nigerian 
 South African 
 Ugandan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Asia 
 
 
 
 
 Bruneian 
 Burmese 
 Filipino 
 Hong Kong 
 Indian 
 Malaysian 
 Pakistani 
 Singaporean 
 Sri Lankan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 t 
 e 
 
 
 Modern Germanic languages and dialects 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 North Germanic 
 
 
 
 
 West Scandinavian 
 
 
 
 Faroese 
 Icelandic 
 Norwegian ( Nynorsk ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 East Scandinavian 
 
 
 
 Danish 
 Norwegian ( Bokmål ) 
 Swedish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 West Germanic 
 
 
 
 
 Anglo-Frisian 
 
 
 
 English 
 North Frisian 
 Saterland Frisian 
 Scots 
 West Frisian 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Low Franconian 
 
 
 
 Afrikaans 
 Dutch 
 West Flemish 
 Limburgish 
 Zeelandic 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Low German / 
 Dutch Low Saxon 
 
 
 
 Achterhooks 
 Drèents 
 East Frisian Low Saxon 
 Gronings 
 Low German 
 Plautdietsch 
 Sallaans 
 Stellingwarfs 
 Tweants 
 Veluws 
 Westphalian 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 High German 
 
 
 
 
 Central German 
 
 
 
 Colognian 
 German 
 Luxembourgish 
 Palatine German 
 Pennsylvania German 
 Hunsrik 
 Silesian German 
 Upper Saxon 
 Wymysorys 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Upper German 
 
 
 
 Alsatian 
 Bavarian 
 Colonia Tovar 
 Main-Franconian 
 Cimbrian 
 Hutterite German 
 Mòcheno 
 Swabian 
 Swiss German 
 Walser 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yiddish 
 
 
 
 Yiddish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 t 
 e 
 
 
 Dictionaries of English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Old and Middle English 
 
 
 
 An Anglo-Saxon Dictionary 
 Dict. of Old English 
 Middle English Dictionary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Historic 
 
 
 
 Edward Phillips' (1658) 
 John Kersey's (1702) 
 Nathan Bailey's (1721) 
 Samuel Johnson's (1755) 
 Noah Webster's (1828) 
 Century (1889–91) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Oxford University Press 
 
 
 
 Oxford English Dictionary 
 Shorter Oxford 
 Oxford Dict. of English 
 Concise Oxford 
 Historical Thesaurus 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 American English 
 
 
 
 American Heritage 
 Dict. of American English 
 Dict. of American Regional English 
 New Oxford American 
 Random House Webster's 
 Webster's New World 
 Webster's Third New International 
 World Book Dictionary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 British English 
 
 
 
 Chambers 
 Collins 
 Penguin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Canadian English 
 
 
 
 List of Canadian English dictionaries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Other regions 
 
 
 
 Australian National 
 Australian Oxford 
 Macquarie 
 DCHP 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Online 
 
 
 
 Wiktionary 
 Collaborative International Dict. of English 
 Urban Dictionary 
 Wordnik 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Learners / ESL 
 
 
 
 Cambridge Advanced Learner's 
 Collins COBUILD Advanced 
 Longman Dict. of Contemporary English 
 Macmillan English Dict. for Advanced Learners 
 Merriam-Webster's Advanced Learner's 
 Oxford Advanced Learner's 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 &#160; 
 Geopolitical use 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 t 
 e 
 
 
 English-speaking world 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Click on a coloured area to see an article about English in that country or region 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 &#160; 
 Further links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Articles 
 
 
 
 Anglosphere 
 History of the English language 
 British Empire 
 English in the Commonwealth of Nations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lists 
 
 
 
 List of countries by English-speaking population 
 List of countries where English is an official language 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 &#160; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Countries and territories where English is the national language or the native language of the majority 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Africa 
 
 
 
 Saint Helena 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Americas 
 
 
 
 Anguilla 
 Antigua and Barbuda 
 The Bahamas 
 Barbados 
 Belize 
 Bermuda 
 British Virgin Islands 
 Canada 
 Cayman Islands 
 Dominica 
 Falkland Islands 
 Grenada 
 Guyana 
 Jamaica 
 Montserrat 
 Saba 
 Saint Kitts and Nevis 
 Saint Lucia 
 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
 Sint Eustatius 
 Sint Maarten 
 South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands 
 Trinidad and Tobago 
 Turks and Caicos Islands 
 United States 
 United States Virgin Islands 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Europe 
 
 
 
 Guernsey 
 Ireland 
 Isle of Man 
 Jersey 
 United Kingdom 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Oceania 
 
 
 
 Australia 
 New Zealand 
 Norfolk Island 
 Pitcairn Islands 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 &#160; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Countries and territories where English is an official language, but not the majority first language 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Africa 
 
 
 
 Botswana 
 Cameroon 
 Ethiopia 
 Eritrea 
 The Gambia 
 Ghana 
 Kenya 
 Lesotho 
 Liberia 
 Malawi 
 Mauritius 
 Namibia 
 Nigeria 
 Rwanda 
 Sierra Leone 
 Somaliland 
 South Africa 
 South Sudan 
 Sudan 
 Swaziland 
 Tanzania 
 Uganda 
 Zambia 
 Zimbabwe 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Americas 
 
 
 
 Puerto Rico 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Asia 
 
 
 
 Christmas Island 
 Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
 Hong Kong 
 India 
 Malaysia 
 Pakistan 
 Philippines 
 Singapore 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Europe 
 
 
 
 Gibraltar 
 Malta 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Oceania 
 
 
 
 American Samoa 
 Cook Islands 
 Fiji 
 Guam 
 Kiribati 
 Marshall Islands 
 Micronesia 
 Nauru 
 Niue 
 Northern Mariana Islands 
 Palau 
 Papua New Guinea 
 Samoa 
 Solomon Islands 
 Tokelau 
 Tuvalu 
 Vanuatu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dependencies shown in italics . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    



 								 
				Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=English_language&amp;oldid=598718275 "				 
												 Categories : Languages with ISO 639-2 code Languages with ISO 639-1 code English language English languages Languages of American Samoa Languages of Antigua and Barbuda Languages of Australia Languages of Belize Languages of Bermuda Languages of Botswana Languages of Cameroon Languages of Canada Languages of Fiji Languages of Ghana Languages of Grenada Languages of Guam Languages of Guyana Languages of Hong Kong Languages of India Languages of Ireland Languages of Jamaica Languages of Kenya Languages of Kiribati Languages of Lesotho Languages of Liberia Languages of Malawi Languages of Malaysia Languages of Malta Languages of Mauritius Languages of Namibia Languages of Nauru Languages of New Zealand Languages of Nigeria Languages of Niue Languages of Pakistan Languages of Palau Languages of Papua New Guinea Languages of Rwanda Languages of Saint Kitts and Nevis Languages of Saint Lucia Languages of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Languages of Samoa Languages of Seychelles Languages of Sierra Leone Languages of Singapore Languages of South Africa Languages of South Sudan Languages of Sudan Languages of Swaziland Languages of the Bahamas Languages of the British Virgin Islands Languages of the Cayman Islands Languages of the Gambia Languages of the Marshall Islands Languages of the Philippines Languages of the Pitcairn Islands Languages of the Solomon Islands Languages of the United Kingdom Languages of the United States Virgin Islands Languages of the United States Languages of Tokelau Languages of Trinidad and Tobago Languages of Uganda Languages of Vanuatu Languages of Zambia Languages of Zimbabwe Stress-timed languages Subject–verb–object languages  Hidden categories: Articles with Swedish-language external links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from October 2011 Pages containing links to subscription-only content Pages containing cite templates with deprecated parameters CS1 errors: dates Articles with dead external links from October 2010 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from December 2010 Use dmy dates from November 2012 Use British English from January 2014 Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2008 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2013 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2014  												 
							 
		 
		 
			 Navigation menu 
			 
				 
	 Personal tools 
	 
 Create account Log in 	 
 
				 
					 
	 Namespaces 
	 
					 Article 
					 Talk 
			 
 
 
	 
		 
	 Variants 
	 
		 
					 
	 
 
				 
				 
					 
	 Views 
	 
					 Read 
					 View source 
					 View history 
			 
 
 
	 Actions 
	 
		 
					 
	 
 
 
	 Search 
	 
					 
					 		 
	 
 
				 
			 
			 
					 
				 
	 Navigation 
	 
		 
			 Main page 
			 Contents 
			 Featured content 
			 Current events 
			 Random article 
			 Donate to Wikipedia 
			 Wikimedia Shop 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Interaction 
	 
		 
			 Help 
			 About Wikipedia 
			 Community portal 
			 Recent changes 
			 Contact page 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Tools 
	 
		 
			 What links here 
			 Related changes 
			 Upload file 
			 Special pages 
			 Permanent link 
			 Page information 
			 Data item 
 Cite this page 		 
	 
 
 
	 Print/export 
	 
		 
			 Create a book 
			 Download as PDF 
			 Printable version 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Languages 
	 
		 
			 Acèh 
			 Адыгэбзэ 
			 Afrikaans 
			 Akan 
			 Alemannisch 
			 አማርኛ 
			 Ænglisc 
			 العربية 
			 Aragonés 
			 ܐܪܡܝܐ 
			 Armãneashce 
			 Arpetan 
			 অসমীয়া 
			 Asturianu 
			 Avañe'ẽ 
			 Авар 
			 Aymar aru 
			 Azərbaycanca 
			 Bamanankan 
			 বাংলা 
			 Bahasa Banjar 
			 Bân-lâm-gú 
			 Basa Banyumasan 
			 Башҡортса 
			 Беларуская 
			 Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ 
			 Bikol Central 
			 Български 
			 Boarisch 
			 བོད་ཡིག 
			 Bosanski 
			 Brezhoneg 
			 Буряад 
			 Català 
			 Чӑвашла 
			 Cebuano 
			 Čeština 
			 Chavacano de Zamboanga 
			 Chi-Chewa 
			 ChiShona 
			 Corsu 
			 Cymraeg 
			 Dansk 
			 Deitsch 
			 Deutsch 
			 ދިވެހިބަސް 
			 Diné bizaad 
			 Dolnoserbski 
			 Eesti 
			 Ελληνικά 
			 Emiliàn e rumagnòl 
			 Эрзянь 
			 Español 
			 Esperanto 
			 Estremeñu 
			 Euskara 
			 Eʋegbe 
			 فارسی 
			 Fiji Hindi 
			 Føroyskt 
			 Français 
			 Frysk 
			 Furlan 
			 Gaeilge 
			 Gaelg 
			 Gagauz 
			 Gàidhlig 
			 Galego 
			 贛語 
			 ગુજરાતી 
			 𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺 
			 客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî 
			 Хальмг 
			 한국어 
			 Hawai`i 
			 Հայերեն 
			 हिन्दी 
			 Hornjoserbsce 
			 Hrvatski 
			 Ido 
			 Igbo 
			 Ilokano 
			 বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী 
			 Bahasa Indonesia 
			 Interlingua 
			 Interlingue 
			 ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ/inuktitut 
			 Ирон 
			 IsiXhosa 
			 IsiZulu 
			 Íslenska 
			 Italiano 
			 עברית 
			 Basa Jawa 
			 Kalaallisut 
			 ಕನ್ನಡ 
			 Къарачай-малкъар 
			 ქართული 
			 Kaszëbsczi 
			 Қазақша 
			 Kernowek 
			 Kinyarwanda 
			 Kiswahili 
			 Коми 
			 Kongo 
			 Kreyòl ayisyen 
			 Kurdî 
			 Кыргызча 
			 Ladino 
			 Лакку 
			 Лезги 
			 ລາວ 
			 Latgaļu 
			 Latina 
			 Latviešu 
			 Lëtzebuergesch 
			 Lietuvių 
			 Ligure 
			 Limburgs 
			 Lingála 
			 Lojban 
			 Lumbaart 
			 Magyar 
			 Македонски 
			 Malagasy 
			 മലയാളം 
			 Māori 
			 मराठी 
			 მარგალური 
			 مصرى 
			 مازِرونی 
			 Bahasa Melayu 
			 Baso Minangkabau 
			 Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ 
			 Mirandés 
			 Мокшень 
			 Монгол 
			 မြန်မာဘာသာ 
			 Nāhuatl 
			 Nederlands 
			 Nedersaksies 
			 Nēhiyawēwin / ᓀᐦᐃᔭᐍᐏᐣ 
			 नेपाली 
			 नेपाल भाषा 
			 日本語 
			 Napulitano 
			 Нохчийн 
			 Nordfriisk 
			 Norfuk / Pitkern 
			 Norsk bokmål 
			 Norsk nynorsk 
			 Nouormand 
			 Novial 
			 Occitan 
			 Олык марий 
			 ଓଡ଼ିଆ 
			 Oshiwambo 
			 Oʻzbekcha 
			 ਪੰਜਾਬੀ 
			 पालि 
			 Pälzisch 
			 Pangasinan 
			 پنجابی 
			 Papiamentu 
			 پښتو 
			 Перем Коми 
			 ភាសាខ្មែរ 
			 Picard 
			 Piemontèis 
			 Tok Pisin 
			 Plattdüütsch 
			 Polski 
			 Português 
			 Qırımtatarca 
			 Reo Mā`ohi 
			 Ripoarisch 
			 Română 
			 Rumantsch 
			 Runa Simi 
			 Русиньскый 
			 Русский 
			 Саха тыла 
			 Sámegiella 
			 Gagana Samoa 
			 संस्कृतम् 
			 Sängö 
			 Sardu 
			 Scots 
			 Seeltersk 
			 Sesotho 
			 Sesotho sa Leboa 
			 Shqip 
			 Sicilianu 
			 සිංහල 
			 Simple English 
			 SiSwati 
			 Slovenčina 
			 Slovenščina 
			 Словѣньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟ 
			 Ślůnski 
			 Soomaaliga 
			 کوردی 
			 Sranantongo 
			 Српски / srpski 
			 Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски 
			 Basa Sunda 
			 Suomi 
			 Svenska 
			 Tagalog 
			 தமிழ் 
			 Taqbaylit 
			 Tarandíne 
			 Татарча/tatarça 
			 తెలుగు 
			 ไทย 
			 Тоҷикӣ 
			 ᏣᎳᎩ 
			 Tshivenda 
			 Türkçe 
			 Türkmençe 
			 Twi 
			 Удмурт 
			 ᨅᨔ ᨕᨘᨁᨗ 
			 Українська 
			 اردو 
			 ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche 
			 Vahcuengh 
			 Vèneto 
			 Vepsän kel’ 
			 Tiếng Việt 
			 Volapük 
			 Võro 
			 Walon 
			 文言 
			 West-Vlams 
			 Winaray 
			 Wolof 
			 吴语 
			 ייִדיש 
			 Yorùbá 
			 粵語 
			 Zazaki 
			 Zeêuws 
			 Žemaitėška 
			 中文 
			 Тыва дыл 
			 
			 Edit links 
		 
	 
 
			 
		 
		 
							 
											 This page was last modified on 8 March 2014 at 17:57. 
											 Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. 
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
									 
							 
											 Privacy policy 
											 About Wikipedia 
											 Disclaimers 
											 Contact Wikipedia 
											 Developers 
											 Mobile view