Esperanto - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 





 
 
		 
		 
		 
			 
			 
						 
						 Esperanto 
			 
								 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
								 
												 
					Jump to:					 navigation , 					 search 
				 
				 This article is about the language. For other uses, see Esperanto (disambiguation) . 
 
 
 Esperanto 
 
 
  
 The Esperanto flag 
 
 
 
 Created&#160;by 
 L. L. Zamenhof 
 
 
 Date 
 1887 
 
 
 Setting and usage 
 International auxiliary language 
 
 
 Users 
 Native : on the order of 1,000 &#160;(1996)  
 L2 users: 160,000–300,000 active or fluent (2001);  
 
 
 Purpose 
 
 constructed language 
 
 International auxiliary language 
 
 Esperanto 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Early forms 
 
 
 Proto-Esperanto 
 
 Esperanto 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dialects 
 
 Ido 
 
 
 
 
 Writing system 
 
 Latin ( Esperanto alphabet ) 
 Esperanto Braille 
 
 
 
 Signed form(s) 
 
 Signuno 
 
 
 Sources 
 Vocabulary from Romance and Germanic languages ; phonology from Slavic languages 
 
 
 Official status 
 
 
 Regulated&#160;by 
 Akademio de Esperanto 
 
 
 Language codes 
 
 
 ISO 639-1 
 eo 
 
 
 ISO 639-2 
 epo 
 
 
 ISO 639-3 
 epo 
 
 
 
 Linguist list 
 
 epo 
 
 
 Linguasphere 
 51-AAB-da 
 
 
 This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 Esperanto 
 
 
 
 
 Language 
 Grammar &#160; · Phonology 
 Orthography ( Braille ) 
 Vocabulary &#160; · Etymology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 History 
 Zamenhof &#160; · Proto-Esperanto 
 Unua Libro &#160; ·  Fundamento 
 Declaration of Boulogne 
 Manifesto of Rauma 
 Montevideo Resolution 
 Prague Manifesto 
 Modern evolution of Esperanto 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Culture and media 
 Esperantist &#160; · Esperantujo 
 Clubs &#160; · Film 
 La Espero &#160; · Libraries 
 Literature &#160; · Music 
 Native speakers 
 Pop culture references 
 Publications &#160; · Symbols 
 Zamenhof Day 
 Profanity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 National associations 
 Australia &#160; · Britain ( Youth &#160; · Labour ) 
 Canada ( Quebec )&#160; · New Zealand &#160; · USA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Organizations and services 
 Amikeca Reto &#160; ·  Kurso de Esperanto 
 Esperanto Academy &#160; · Encyclopedia 
 Pasporta Servo &#160; · TEJO &#160; · UEA &#160; · SAT 
 Plouézec Meetings &#160; · World Congress 
 Europe – Democracy – Esperanto 
 European Esperanto Union 
 Panamerican Congress 
 European Youth Week 
 Skolta Esperanto Ligo 
 Youth Congress 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Criticism 
 Gender 
 Esperantido &#160; · Reformed 
 vs. Ido &#160; ·  vs. Interlingua &#160; ·  vs. Novial 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Related topics 
 Auxiliary language 
 Constructed language 
 Ido &#160; · Interlingua &#160; · Novial 
 Occidental &#160; · Volapük 
 Anationalism 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia 
 Portal &#160; · Task force &#160; · Esperanto Wikipedia ( Vikipedio ) 
 Vikivortaro &#160; · Vikicitaro &#160; · Vikifontaro 
 Vikilibroj &#160; · Vikikomunejo 
 Vikispecoj &#160; · Vikinovaĵoj 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 t 
 e 
 
 
 
 
 
 Esperanto ( /  ɛ  s  p  ə  ˈ  r  ɑː  n  t  oʊ  / or /  -  r  æ  n  t  oʊ  / ;  Its name derives from Doktoro Esperanto ("Esperanto" translates as "one who hopes"), the pseudonym under which L. L. Zamenhof published the first book detailing Esperanto, the Unua Libro , on July 26, 1887. Zamenhof's goal was to create an easy-to-learn, politically neutral language that would transcend nationality and foster peace and international understanding between people with different languages. 
 Estimates of Esperanto speakers range from 100,000 to 2,000,000 active or fluent speakers worldwide, including perhaps a thousand native speakers who learned Esperanto from birth as one of their native languages. Lernu.net , the most popular online learning platform of Esperanto, reported 150,000 registered users in 2013, and has between 150,000 and 200,000 monthly visitors.  
 The first World Congress of Esperanto was organized in France in 1905. Since then congresses have been held in various countries every year with the exception of years in which there were world wars. Although no country has adopted Esperanto officially, Esperanto was recommended by the French Academy of Sciences in 1921 and recognized in 1954 by UNESCO , which recommended it to its member states in 1985. Esperanto was the 32nd language accepted as adhering to the " Common European Framework of Reference for Languages " in 2007.  
 Esperanto is currently the language of instruction of the International Academy of Sciences in San Marino .  
 With about 193,000 articles, Esperanto has the 32nd-largest Wikipedia as measured by the number of articles,  
 Currently, Esperanto is seen by many of its speakers as an alternative or addition to the growing use of English throughout the world, offering a language that is easier to learn than English.  
 
 
 
 Contents 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 1.1 Creation 
 1.2 Early proposals 
 1.3 Responses of 20th-century totalitarian regimes to Esperanto 
 
 
 2 Official use 
 3 Linguistic properties 
 
 3.1 Classification 
 3.2 Phonology 
 
 3.2.1 Consonants 
 3.2.2 Vowels 
 
 
 3.3 Alphabet 
 
 3.3.1 Writing diacritics 
 
 
 3.4 Grammar 
 3.5 Vocabulary 
 3.6 Useful phrases 
 3.7 Sample text 
 
 
 4 Education 
 
 4.1 Language acquisition 
 
 
 5 Community 
 
 5.1 Geography and demography 
 
 5.1.1 Number of speakers 
 5.1.2 Native speakers 
 
 
 5.2 Culture 
 5.3 Noted authors in Esperanto 
 5.4 Popular culture 
 5.5 Science 
 5.6 Commerce and trade 
 5.7 Goals of the movement 
 5.8 Symbols and flags 
 5.9 Politics 
 5.10 Religion 
 
 5.10.1 Oomoto 
 5.10.2 Bahá'í Faith 
 5.10.3 Spiritism 
 5.10.4 Bible translations 
 5.10.5 Christianity 
 5.10.6 Islam 
 
 
 
 
 6 Criticism 
 7 Modifications 
 8 Eponymous entities 
 9 See also 
 10 References 
 11 Further reading 
 12 External links 
 
 
 
 History  
 Main article: History of Esperanto 
 Creation  
 
 
 
  
The first Esperanto book by L. L. Zamenhof. 
 
 
 Esperanto was created in the late 1870s and early 1880s by Ludwig Lazarus Zamenhof, an ophthalmologist from Białystok , then part of the Russian Empire. According to Zamenhof, he created the language to foster harmony between people from different countries. His feelings and the situation in Białystok may be gleaned from an extract from his letter to Nikolai Borovko:  
 
 "The place where I was born and spent my childhood gave direction to all my future struggles. In Białystok the inhabitants were divided into four distinct elements: Russians, Poles, Germans and Jews; each of these spoke their own language and looked on all the others as enemies. In such a town a sensitive nature feels more acutely than elsewhere the misery caused by language division and sees at every step that the diversity of languages is the first, or at least the most influential, basis for the separation of the human family into groups of enemies. I was brought up as an idealist; I was taught that all people were brothers, while outside in the street at every step I felt that there were no people, only Russians, Poles, Germans, Jews and so on. This was always a great torment to my infant mind, although many people may smile at such an 'anguish for the world' in a child. Since at that time I thought that 'grown-ups' were omnipotent, so I often said to myself that when I grew up I would certainly destroy this evil." 
 —L. L. Zamenhof, in a letter to Nikolai Borovko, ca. 1895 
 
 After some ten years of development, which Zamenhof spent translating literature into Esperanto as well as writing original prose and verse, the first book of Esperanto grammar was published in Warsaw in 1887. The number of speakers grew rapidly over the next few decades, at first primarily in the Russian Empire and Central Europe, then in other parts of Europe, the Americas, China, and Japan. In the early years, speakers of Esperanto kept in contact primarily through correspondence and periodicals, but in 1905 the first world congress of Esperanto speakers was held in Boulogne-sur-Mer , France. Since then world congresses have been held in different countries every year, except during the two World Wars. Since the Second World War, they have been attended by an average of over 2,000 people and up to 6,000 people. 
 Zamenhof's name for the language was simply Internacia Lingvo ("International Language").  
 Early proposals  
 
 
 
  
Map of Esperanto groups in Europe in 1905. 
 
 
 The autonomous territory of Neutral Moresnet , between what is today Belgium and Germany, had a sizable proportion of Esperanto-speakers among its small and multiethnic population. There was a proposal to make Esperanto its official language. 
 However, time was running out for the tiny territory. Neither Belgium nor Prussia (now within the German Empire) had ever surrendered its original claim to it. Around 1900, Germany in particular was taking a more aggressive stance towards the territory and was accused of sabotage and of obstructing the administrative process in order to force the issue. It was the First World War, however, that was the catalyst that brought about the end of neutrality. On August 4, 1914, Germany invaded Belgium, leaving Moresnet at first "an oasis in a desert of destruction".  In 1915, the territory was annexed by the Kingdom of Prussia, without international recognition. 
 After the Great War, there was a proposal for the League of Nations to accept Esperanto as their working language, following a report by Nitobe Inazō , an official delegate of League of Nations during the 13th World Congress of Esperanto in Prague. Ten delegates accepted the proposal with only one voice against, the French delegate, Gabriel Hanotaux . Hanotaux did not like how the French language was losing its position as the international language and saw Esperanto as a threat, effectively wielding his veto power to block the decision. However, two years later, the League recommended that its member states include Esperanto in their educational curricula. For this reason, many people see the 1920s as the heyday of the Esperanto movement. 
 Responses of 20th-century totalitarian regimes to Esperanto  
 
 
 
  
7th Esperanto congress, Antwerp August 1911. 
 
 
 As a potential vehicle for international understanding, Esperanto attracted the suspicion of many totalitarian states. The situation was especially pronounced in Nazi Germany, Francoist Spain, and the Soviet Union under Joseph Stalin. 
 In Germany, there was additional motivation to persecute Esperanto because Zamenhof was Jewish. In his work, Mein Kampf, Adolf Hitler specifically mentioned Esperanto as an example of a language that could be used by an international Jewish conspiracy once they achieved world domination.  
 In Imperial Japan, the left-wing of the Japanese Esperanto movement was persecuted, but its leaders were careful enough not to give the impression to the government that the Esperantists were revolutionaries, which proved a successful strategy.  
 In the early years of the Soviet Union, Esperanto was given a measure of government support, and the Soviet Esperanto Association was an officially recognized organization.  
 Fascist Italy, however, allowed the use of Esperanto finding its phonology similar to that of Italian and publishing some tourist material in the language. 
 After the Spanish Civil War , Francoist Spain persecuted anarchists and Catalan nationalists , among whom the use of Esperanto was extensive,  but in the 1950s the Esperanto movement was tolerated again. 
 Official use  
 
 
 
  
Location of Moresnet. 
 
 
 Esperanto has never been a secondary official language of any recognized country. However, there were plans at the beginning of the 20th century to establish Neutral Moresnet as the world's first Esperanto state. In addition, the self-proclaimed artificial island micronation of Rose Island used Esperanto as its official language in 1968. In February 2013 an Avaaz petition was created to make Esperanto one of the official languages of the European Union.  
 The US Army has published military phrase books in Esperanto,  to be used in war games by mock enemy forces. In the summer of 1924, the American Radio Relay League adopted Esperanto as its official international auxiliary language, and hoped that the language would be used by radio amateurs in international communications, but its actual use for radio communications was negligible. 
 Esperanto is the working language of several non-profit international organizations such as the Sennacieca Asocio Tutmonda , a left-wing cultural association, or Education@Internet , which has developed from an Esperanto organization; most others are specifically Esperanto organizations. The largest of these, the World Esperanto Association , has an official consultative relationship with the United Nations and UNESCO, which recognized Esperanto as a medium for international understanding in 1954.  
 All the personal documents issued by the World Service Authority , including the World Passport , are written in Esperanto, together with English, French, Spanish, Russian, Arabic, and Chinese.  
 Linguistic properties  
 Classification  
 As a constructed language , Esperanto is not genealogically related to any ethnic language. It has been described as "a language lexically predominantly Romanic , morphologically intensively agglutinative , and to a certain degree isolating in character".  The phonology , grammar , vocabulary , and semantics are based on the Indo-European languages spoken in Europe. The sound inventory is essentially Slavic , as is much of the semantics, whereas the vocabulary derives primarily from the Romance languages , with a lesser contribution from Germanic languages and minor contributions from Slavic languages and Greek. Pragmatics and other aspects of the language not specified by Zamenhof's original documents were influenced by the native languages of early authors, primarily Russian, Polish, German, and French. 
 Typologically , Esperanto has prepositions and a pragmatic word order that by default is subject–verb–object . Adjectives can be freely placed before or after the nouns they modify, though placing them before the noun is more common. New words are formed through extensive prefixing and suffixing . 
 Phonology  
 Main article: Esperanto phonology 
 Esperanto has 23 consonants, 5 vowels, and 2 semivowels that combine with the vowels to form 6 diphthongs . (The consonant /j/ and semivowel /i̯/ are both written j , and the uncommon consonant /dz/ is written with the digraph dz ,  . 
 Consonants  
 The 23 consonants are: 
 
 
 
 Bilabial 
 Labio- 
dental 
 Alveolar 
 Post- 
alveolar 
 Palatal 
 Velar 
 Glottal 
 
 
 Nasal 
 m 
 &#160; 
 n 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 
 
 Stop 
 p 
 b 
 &#160; 
 t 
 d 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 k 
 ɡ 
 &#160; 
 
 
 Affricate 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 t͡s 
 d͡z 
 t͡ʃ 
 d͡ʒ 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 
 
 Fricative 
 &#160; 
 f 
 v 
 s 
 z 
 ʃ 
 ʒ 
 &#160; 
 x 
 &#160; 
 h 
 &#160; 
 
 
 Trill 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 r 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 
 
 Approximant 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 l 
 &#160; 
 j 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 
 
 The sound / r / is usually trilled  . 
 A large number of consonant clusters can occur, up to three in initial position (as in stranga , "strange") and four in medial position (as in instrui , "teach"). Final clusters are uncommon except in foreign names, poetic elision of final o, and a very few basic words such as cent "hundred" and post "after". 
 Vowels  
 Esperanto has the five cardinal vowels found in such languages as Spanish , Swahili , Tagalog , Modern Hebrew , and Modern Greek : 
 
 
 
 Front 
 Back 
 
 
 Close 
 i 
 u 
 
 
 Mid 
 e 
 o 
 
 
 Open 
 a 
 
 
 There are also two semivowels, /i̯/ and /u̯/ , which combine with the cardinal vowels to form six falling diphthongs : aj, ej, oj, uj, aŭ, and eŭ . 
 Since there are only five vowels, a good deal of variation in pronunciation is tolerated. For instance, e commonly ranges from  ). 
 Alphabet  
 Main article: Esperanto orthography 
 The Esperanto alphabet is based on the Latin script , using a one-sound-one-letter principle. It includes six letters with diacritics : ĉ , ĝ , ĥ , ĵ , ŝ (with circumflex ), and ŭ (with breve ). The alphabet does not include the letters q, w, x, or y , which are only used when writing unassimilated foreign terms or proper names. 
 The 28-letter alphabet is: 
 a b c ĉ d e f g ĝ h ĥ i j ĵ k l m n o p r s ŝ t u ŭ v z 
 All unaccented letters are pronounced approximately as in the IPA , with the exception of c . Esperanto j and c are used in a way familiar to speakers of many Northern, Central and Eastern European languages, but which is largely unfamiliar to English speakers: j has a y sound, as in y ellow and bo y , and c has a ts sound, as in hi ts or the zz in pi zz a .  The accented letters are a bit like h -digraphs in English: Ĉ is pronounced like English ch , and ŝ like sh . Ĝ is the g in g em , ĵ a zh sound, as in fu s ion or French J acques , and the rare ĥ is like the German Ba ch , or older Scottish English lo ch . 
 
 
 Letter 
 c 
 ĉ 
 ĝ 
 ĥ 
 ĵ 
 ŝ 
 ŭ 
 
 
 Pronunciation 
 t͡s 
 t͡ʃ 
 d͡ʒ 
 x 
 ʒ 
 ʃ 
 u̯ 
 (in diphthongs) 
 
 
 Writing diacritics  
 Until the widespread adoption of Unicode, the letters with diacritics (found in the "Latin-Extended A" section of the Unicode Standard ) caused problems with printing and computing. This was particularly true of the five letters with circumflexes, as they do not occur in any other language. These problems have abated, and are now normally seen only with computing applications that are limited to ASCII characters (typically internet chat systems and databases). 
 There are two principal workarounds to this problem, which substitute digraphs for the accented letters. Zamenhof, the inventor of Esperanto, created an "h-convention", which replaces ĉ, ĝ, ĥ, ĵ, ŝ, and ŭ with ch, gh, hh, jh, sh, and u, respectively. If used in a database, a program in principle could not determine whether to render, for example, ch as c followed by h or as ĉ , and would fail to render, for example, the word senchava properly. A more recent " x-convention " has gained ground since the advent of computing. This system replaces each diacritic with an x (not part of the Esperanto alphabet) after the letter, producing the six digraphs cx, gx, hx, jx, sx, and ux. 
 There are computer keyboard layouts that support the Esperanto alphabet, and some systems use software that automatically replaces x- or h-convention digraphs with the corresponding diacritic letters (EK for Microsoft Windows  are Examples). Another example is the Esperanto Wikipedia, which accepts the x-convention for input: when a contributor types cx when editing an article, it will appear as the correct ĉ in the article text. (The input pane also accepts ĉ ; when the page is saved, it will be changed to cx , so that the x-convention applies uniformly in the wikitext.) 
 Grammar  
 Main article: Esperanto grammar 
 Esperanto words are derived by stringing together prefixes , roots , and suffixes . This process is regular, so that people can create new words as they speak and be understood. Compound words are formed with a modifier-first, head-final order, as in English (compare "birdsong" and "songbird," and likewise, birdokanto and kantobirdo ). 
 The different parts of speech are marked by their own suffixes: all common nouns end in -o , all adjectives in -a , all derived adverbs in -e , and all verbs in one of six tense and mood suffixes, such as the present tense -as . 
 Plural nouns used as grammatical subjects end in -oj (pronounced like English "oy"), whereas their singular direct object forms end in -on . Plural direct objects end with the combination -ojn (rhymes with "coin"); -o- indicates that the word is a noun, -j- indicates the plural, and -n indicates the accusative. Adjectives agree with their nouns; their endings are plural -aj (pronounced "eye"), accusative -an , and plural accusative -ajn (rhymes with "fine"). 
 
 
 
 
 
 Noun 
 Subject 
 Object 
 
 
 Singular 
 - o 
 - on 
 
 
 Plural 
 - oj 
 - ojn 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Adjective 
 Subject 
 Object 
 
 
 Singular 
 - a 
 - an 
 
 
 Plural 
 - aj 
 - ajn 
 
 
 
 
 
 The suffix -n , besides indicating the direct object, is used to indicate movement and a few other things as well. 
 The six verb inflections consist of three tenses and three moods. They are present tense -as , future tense -os , past tense -is , infinitive mood -i , conditional mood -us and jussive mood -u (used for wishes and commands). Verbs are not marked for person or number. Thus, kanti means "to sing", mi kantas means "I sing", vi kantas means "you sing", and ili kantas means "they sing". 
 
 
 
 
 
 Verbal Tense 
 Suffix 
 
 
 Present 
 -as (kantas) 
 
 
 Past 
 -is (kantis) 
 
 
 Future 
 -os (kantos) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Verbal Mood 
 Suffix 
 
 
 Infinitive 
 -i (kanti) 
 
 
 Jussive 
 -u (kantu) 
 
 
 Conditional 
 -us (kantus) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Word order is comparatively free. Adjectives may precede or follow nouns; subjects, verbs and objects may occur in any order. However, the article la "the", demonstratives such as tiu "that" and prepositions (such as ĉe "at") must come before their related nouns. Similarly, the negative ne "not" and conjunctions such as kaj "and" and ke "that" must precede the phrase or clause that they introduce. In copular (A = B) clauses, word order is just as important as in English: "people are animals" is distinguished from "animals are people". 
 Vocabulary  
 Main article: Esperanto vocabulary 
 The core vocabulary of Esperanto was defined by Lingvo internacia , published by Zamenhof in 1887. This book listed 900 roots; these could be expanded into tens of thousands of words using prefixes, suffixes, and compounding. In 1894, Zamenhof published the first Esperanto dictionary , Universala Vortaro , which had a larger set of roots. The rules of the language allowed speakers to borrow new roots as needed; it was recommended, however, that speakers use most international forms and then derive related meanings from these. 
 Since then, many words have been borrowed, primarily (but not solely) from the European languages. Not all proposed borrowings become widespread, but many do, especially technical and scientific terms. Terms for everyday use, on the other hand, are more likely to be derived from existing roots; komputilo "computer", for instance, is formed from the verb komputi "compute" and the suffix -ilo "tool". Words are also calqued ; that is, words acquire new meanings based on usage in other languages. For example, the word muso "mouse" has acquired the meaning of a computer mouse from its usage in English. Esperanto speakers often debate about whether a particular borrowing is justified or whether meaning can be expressed by deriving from or extending the meaning of existing words. 
 Some compounds and formed words in Esperanto are not entirely straightforward; for example, eldoni , literally "give out", means "publish", paralleling the usage of certain European languages (such as German ). In addition, the suffix -um- has no defined meaning; words using the suffix must be learned separately (such as dekstren "to the right" and dekstrumen "clockwise"). 
 There are not many idiomatic or slang words in Esperanto, as these forms of speech tend to make international communication difficult—working against Esperanto's main goal. 
 Useful phrases  
 Below are listed some useful Esperanto words and phrases along with IPA transcriptions: 
 
 
 English 
 Esperanto 
 IPA 
 
 
 Hello 
 Saluton 
  
 
 
 Yes 
 Jes 
  
 
 
 No 
 Ne 
  
 
 
 Good morning 
 Bonan matenon 
  
 
 
 Good evening 
 Bonan vesperon 
  
 
 
 Good night 
 Bonan nokton 
  
 
 
 Goodbye 
 Ĝis revido 
  
 
 
 What is your name? 
 Kio estas via nomo? 
  
 
 
 My name is Marc. 
 Mia nomo estas Marko. 
  
 
 
 How are you? 
 Kiel vi fartas? 
  
 
 
 I am well. 
 Mi fartas bone. 
  
 
 
 Do you speak Esperanto? 
 Ĉu vi parolas Esperanton? 
  
 
 
 I don't understand you 
 Mi ne komprenas vin 
  
 
 
 All right 
 Bone 
  
 
 
 Okay 
 Ĝuste 
  
 
 
 Thank you 
 Dankon 
  
 
 
 You're welcome 
 Ne dankinde 
  
 
 
 Please 
 Bonvolu 
  
 
 
 Forgive me/Excuse me 
 Pardonu min 
  
 
 
 Bless you 
 Sanon! 
  
 
 
 Congratulations 
 Gratulon 
  
 
 
 I love you 
 Mi amas vin 
  
 
 
 One beer, please 
 Unu bieron, mi petas 
  
 
 
 Where is the toilet? 
 Kie estas la necesejo? 
  
 
 
 What is that? 
 Kio estas tio? 
  
 
 
 That is a dog 
 Tio estas hundo 
  
 
 
 Peace! 
 Pacon! 
  
 
 
 I am a beginner in Esperanto. 
 Mi estas komencanto de Esperanto. 
  
 
 
 Sample text  
 The following short extract gives an idea of the character of Esperanto.  (Pronunciation is covered above; the Esperanto letter j is pronounced like English y .) 
 
 Esperanto: 
 
 
 «En multaj lokoj de Ĉinio estis temploj de la drako-reĝo. Dum trosekeco oni preĝis en la temploj, ke la drako-reĝo donu pluvon al la homa mondo. Tiam drako estis simbolo de la supernatura estaĵo. Kaj pli poste, ĝi fariĝis prapatro de la plej altaj regantoj kaj simbolis la absolutan aŭtoritaton de feŭda imperiestro. La imperiestro pretendis, ke li estas filo de la drako. Ĉiuj liaj vivbezonaĵoj portis la nomon drako kaj estis ornamitaj per diversaj drakofiguroj. Nun ĉie en Ĉinio videblas drako-ornamentaĵoj, kaj cirkulas legendoj pri drakoj.» 
 
 
 English translation: 
 
 
 In many places in China, there were temples of the dragon-king. During times of drought, people would pray in the temples that the dragon-king would give rain to the human world. At that time the dragon was a symbol of the supernatural. Later on, it became the ancestor of the highest rulers and symbolised the absolute authority of the feudal emperor. The emperor claimed to be the son of the dragon. All of his personal possessions carried the name "dragon" and were decorated with various dragon figures. Now dragon decorations can be seen everywhere in China and legends about dragons circulate. 
 
 Education  
 The majority of Esperanto speakers learn the language through self-directed study , online tutorials, and correspondence courses taught by volunteers. In more recent years, free teaching websites, like lernu! , have become popular. 
 Esperanto instruction is occasionally available at schools, including four primary schools in a pilot project under the supervision of the University of Manchester , and by one count at 69 universities.  
 Various educators have estimated that Esperanto can be learned in anywhere from one quarter to one twentieth the amount of time required for other languages.  
 The Institute of Cybernetic Pedagogy at Paderborn (Germany) has compared the length of study time it takes natively French-speaking high-school students to obtain comparable 'standard' levels in Esperanto, English, German, and Italian.  The results were: 
 
 2000 hours studying German = 1500 hours studying English = 1000 hours studying Italian (or any other Romance language ) = 150 hours studying Esperanto. 
 
 Language acquisition  
 Main article: Propaedeutic value of Esperanto 
 Four primary schools in Britain, with some 230 pupils, are currently following a course in " propaedeutic Esperanto"—that is, instruction in Esperanto to raise language awareness and accelerate subsequent learning of foreign languages—under the supervision of the University of Manchester. As they put it, 
 
 Many schools used to teach children the recorder , not to produce a nation of recorder players, but as a preparation for learning other instruments.  
 
 Studies have been conducted in New Zealand,  
 Community  
 Geography and demography  
 
 
 Location map of hosts of the Esperanto community hospitality service Pasporta Servo (akin to CouchSurfing ), by 2005. 
 
 
 Esperanto is by far the most widely spoken constructed language in the world.  
 Number of speakers  
 An estimate of the number of Esperanto speakers was made by Sidney S. Culbert , a retired psychology professor at the University of Washington and a longtime Esperantist, who tracked down and tested Esperanto speakers in sample areas in dozens of countries over a period of twenty years. Culbert concluded that between one and two million people speak Esperanto at Foreign Service Level 3 , "professionally proficient" (able to communicate moderately complex ideas without hesitation, and to follow speeches, radio broadcasts, etc.).  Since Culbert never published detailed intermediate results for particular countries and regions, it is difficult to independently gauge the accuracy of his results. 
 In the Almanac, his estimates for numbers of language speakers were rounded to the nearest million, thus the number for Esperanto speakers is shown as two million. This latter figure appears in Ethnologue . Assuming that this figure is accurate, that means that about 0.03% of the world's population speaks the language. Although it is not Zamenhof's goal of a universal language , it still represents a level of popularity unmatched by any other constructed language. 
 Marcus Sikosek (now Ziko van Dijk ) has challenged this figure of 1.6 million as exaggerated. He estimated that even if Esperanto speakers were evenly distributed, assuming one million Esperanto speakers worldwide would lead one to expect about 180 in the city of Cologne . Van Dijk finds only 30 fluent speakers in that city, and similarly smaller-than-expected figures in several other places thought to have a larger-than-average concentration of Esperanto speakers. He also notes that there are a total of about 20,000 members of the various Esperanto organizations (other estimates are higher). Though there are undoubtedly many Esperanto speakers who are not members of any Esperanto organization, he thinks it unlikely that there are fifty times more speakers than organization members.  
 Finnish linguist Jouko Lindstedt , an expert on native-born Esperanto speakers, presented the following scheme  to show the overall proportions of language capabilities within the Esperanto community: 
 
 1,000 have Esperanto as their native language. 
 10,000 speak it fluently. 
 100,000 can use it actively. 
 1,000,000 understand a large amount passively. 
 10,000,000 have studied it to some extent at some time. 
 
 In the absence of Dr. Culbert's detailed sampling data, or any other census data, it is impossible to state the number of speakers with certainty. According to the website of the World Esperanto Association : 
 
 Numbers of textbooks sold and membership of local societies put the number of people with some knowledge of the language in the hundreds of thousands and possibly millions.  
 
 In 2009 Lu Wunsch-Rolshoven used 2001 year census data  
 Native speakers  
 Main article: Native Esperanto speakers 
 Native Esperanto speakers, denaskuloj, have learned the language from birth from Esperanto-speaking parents.  
 Culture  
 
 
 
  
Esperanto books at the World Esperanto Congress , Rotterdam 2008. 
 
 
 Main articles: Esperanto culture , Esperanto literature , Esperanto film , and Esperanto music 
 Esperantists can access an international culture , including a large body of original as well as translated literature . There are over 25,000 Esperanto books, both originals and translations, as well as several regularly distributed Esperanto magazines . In 2013 a museum about Esperanto opened in China.  
 Every year, 1,500–3,000 Esperantists meet for the World Congress of Esperanto (Universala Kongreso de Esperanto) .  
 Historically, much Esperanto music , such as Kaj Tiel Plu , has been in various folk traditions.  There is also a variety of classical and semi-classical choral music, both original and translated, as well as large ensemble music that includes voices singing Esperanto texts. Lou Harrison , who incorporated styles and instruments from many world cultures in his music, used Esperanto titles and/or texts in several of his works, most notably La Koro-Sutro (1973). David Gaines used Esperanto poems as well as an excerpt from a speech by Dr. Zamenhof for his Symphony No. 1 (Esperanto) for mezzo-soprano and orchestra (1994–98). He wrote original Esperanto text for his Povas plori mi ne plu ( I Can Cry No Longer ) for unaccompanied SATB choir (1994). 
 There are also shared traditions , such as Zamenhof Day , and shared behaviour patterns. Esperantists speak primarily in Esperanto at international Esperanto meetings . 
 Detractors of Esperanto occasionally criticize it as "having no culture". Proponents, such as Prof. Humphrey Tonkin of the University of Hartford , observe that Esperanto is "culturally neutral by design, as it was intended to be a facilitator between cultures, not to be the carrier of any one national culture". The late Scottish Esperanto author William Auld wrote extensively on the subject, arguing that Esperanto is "the expression of a common human culture , unencumbered by national frontiers. Thus it is considered a culture on its own."  
 Noted authors in Esperanto  
 Main article: Esperanto authors 
 Some authors of works in Esperanto are: 
 
 
 
 
 William Auld 
 Julio Baghy 
 Kazimierz Bein (Kabe) 
 Marjorie Boulton 
 Jorge Camacho 
 Fernando de Diego (mainly translations) 
 Vasili Eroshenko 
 Jean Forge 
 Antoni Grabowski 
 Kalman Kalocsay 
 Nikolai Nekrasov 
 Nemere István 
 Þórbergur Þórðarson 
 
 
 
 
 Claude Piron 
 Edmond Privat 
 Frederic Pujulà i Vallès 
 Baldur Ragnarsson 
 Reto Rossetti 
 Raymond Schwartz 
 Tibor Sekelj 
 Tivadar Soros 
 Vladimir Varankin 
 Gaston Waringhien 
 L. L. Zamenhof 
 Muztar Abbasi (Translated the Quran into Esperanto) 
 
 
 
 
 Popular culture  
 Main article: Esperanto in popular culture 
 
 
 
  
Scene from Chaplin's The Great Dictator with a shop sign reading Vestaĵoj Malnovaj ("Old Clothes"). 
 
 
 Esperanto has been used in a number of films and novels. Typically, this is done either to add the exotic flavour of a foreign language without representing any particular ethnicity, or to avoid going to the trouble of inventing a new language. The Charlie Chaplin film The Great Dictator (1940) showed Jewish ghetto shop signs in Esperanto. Two full-length feature films have been produced with dialogue entirely in Esperanto: Angoroj , in 1964, and Incubus , a 1965 B-movie horror film. Other amateur productions have been made, such as a dramatisation of the novel Gerda Malaperis (Gerda Has Disappeared). A number of "mainstream" films in national languages have used Esperanto in some way. 
 Esperanto is used as the universal language in the far future of Harry Harrison 's Stainless Steel Rat and Deathworld stories. Poul Anderson 's story " High Treason " takes place in a future where Earth became united politically but was still divided into many languages and cultures, and Esperanto became the language of its space armed forces, fighting wars with various extraterrestrial races. 
 The opening song to the popular video game Final Fantasy XI , 'Memoro de la Ŝtono', was written in Esperanto. It was the first game in the series that was played online, and would have players from both Japan and North America (official European support was added after the North American launch) playing together on the same servers, using an auto-translate tool to communicate. The composer, Nobuo Uematsu , felt that Esperanto was a good language to symbolize worldwide unity. 
 In the television show Red Dwarf , the bulk of which takes place over three million years in the future, crewman Arnold Rimmer constantly spends his time trying to learn Esperanto and failing, even compared to his bunkmate Dave Lister who only maintains a casual interest. Additionally many of the signs around the ship ' Red Dwarf ' are written in both English and Esperanto. The novel Infinity Welcomes Careful Drivers states that, although not required, it is widely expected that officers in the Space Corps be fluent in the language, hence Rimmer's interest. 
 Science  
 
 
 
  
Hungarian astronaut Bertalan Farkas , the first Esperantist in space. 
 
 
 In 1921 the French Academy of Sciences recommended using Esperanto for international scientific communication.  
 A message in Esperanto was recorded and included in Voyager 1 ' s Golden Record . 
 Commerce and trade  
 Esperanto business groups have been active for many years. The French Chamber of Commerce did research in the 1920s and reported in The New York Times in 1921 that Esperanto seemed to be the best business language.  
 Goals of the movement  
 Zamenhof's intention was to create an easy-to-learn language to foster international understanding. It was to serve as an international auxiliary language, that is, as a universal second language, not to replace ethnic languages. This goal was widely shared among Esperanto speakers in the early decades of the movement. Later, Esperanto speakers began to see the language and the culture that had grown up around it as ends in themselves, even if Esperanto is never adopted by the United Nations or other international organizations.  
 Those Esperanto speakers who want to see Esperanto adopted officially or on a large scale worldwide are commonly called finvenkistoj , from fina venko , meaning "final victory", or pracelistoj , from pracelo , meaning "original goal".  
 The Prague Manifesto (1996) presents the views of the mainstream of the Esperanto movement and of its main organisation, the World Esperanto Association (UEA).  
 Symbols and flags  
 Main article: Esperanto symbols 
 
 
 
 Esperanto symbols 
 
 
  
 The verda stelo 
 
 
  
 The jubilea simbolo 
 
 
 
 The earliest flag, and the one most commonly used today, features a green five-pointed star against a white canton , upon a field of green. It was proposed to Zamenhof by Irishman Richard Geoghegan , author of the first Esperanto textbook for English speakers, in 1887. The flag was approved in 1905 by delegates to the first conference of Esperantists at Boulogne-sur-Mer. A version with an "E" superimposed over the green star is sometimes seen. Other variants include that for Christian Esperantists, with a white Christian cross superimposed upon the green star, and that for Leftists, with the color of the field changed from green to red .  
 In 1987, a second flag design was chosen in a contest organized by the UEA celebrating the first centennial of the language. It featured a white background with two stylised curved "E"s facing each other. Dubbed the "jubilea simbolo" ( jubilee symbol ),  
 Politics  
 Esperanto has been placed in many proposed political situations. The most popular of these is the Europe&#160;– Democracy&#160;– Esperanto , which aims to establish Esperanto as the official language of the European Union . A report published in 2005 by François Grin found that the use of English as the lingua franca within the European Union costs billions annually and significantly benefits English-speaking countries financially. The report considered a scenario where Esperanto would be the lingua franca and found that it would have many advantages, particularly economically speaking, as well as ideologically. 
 Religion  
 Esperanto has served an important role in several religions, such as Oomoto from Japan and the Baha'i Faith from Iran , and has been encouraged by others, like some Spiritist movements. 
 Oomoto  
 The Oomoto religion encourages the use of Esperanto among its followers and includes Zamenhof as one of its deified spirits.  
 Bahá'í Faith  
 The Bahá'í Faith encourages the use of an auxiliary international language . The Baha'i's believe that it will not be the language of the future, although it has great potential in this role, as it has not been chosen by the people.  and various volumes of the Bahá'í literatures and other Baha'i books have been translated into Esperanto. In 1973, the Bahá'í Esperanto-League for active Bahá'í supporters of Esperanto was founded. 
 Spiritism  
 In 1908, spiritist Camilo Chaigneau wrote an article named "Spiritism and Esperanto" in the periodic La Vie d'Outre-Tombe recommending the use of Esperanto in a "central magazine" for all spiritists and esperantists. Esperanto then became actively promoted by spiritists, at least in Brazil , initially by Ismael Gomes Braga and František Lorenz ; the latter is known in Brazil as Francisco Valdomiro Lorenz, and was a pioneer of both spiritist and Esperantist movements in this country.  
 The Brazilian Spiritist Federation publishes Esperanto coursebooks, translations of Spiritism's basic books , and encourages Spiritists to become Esperantists.  
 Bible translations  
 The first translation of the Bible into Esperanto was a translation of the Tanakh or Old Testament done by L. L. Zamenhof . The translation was reviewed and compared with other languages' translations by a group of British clergy and scholars before its publication at the British and Foreign Bible Society in 1910. In 1926 this was published along with a New Testament translation, in an edition commonly called the "Londona Biblio". In the 1960s, the Internacia Asocio de Bibliistoj kaj Orientalistoj tried to organize a new, ecumenical Esperanto Bible version.  Since then, the Dutch Remonstrant pastor Gerrit Berveling has translated the Deuterocanonical or apocryphal books in addition to new translations of the Gospels, some of the New Testament epistles, and some books of the Tanakh or Old Testament. These have been published in various separate booklets, or serialized in Dia Regno , but the Deuterocanonical books have appeared in recent editions of the Londona Biblio. 
 Christianity  
 
 
 
  
Mass in Esperanto during the 95th World Congress of Esperanto in Havana. 
 
 
 Christian Esperanto organizations include two that were formed early in the history of Esperanto: 
 
 1910&#160;– The International Union of Catholic Esperantists . Two Roman Catholic popes, John Paul II and Benedict XVI , have regularly used Esperanto in their multilingual urbi et orbi blessings at Easter and Christmas each year since Easter 1994.  
 1911&#160;– The International Christian Esperantists League . 
 
 Individual churches using Esperanto include: 
 
 The Quaker Esperanto Society, with activities as described in an issue of "The Friend"  
 1910&#160;– First Christadelphian publications in Esperanto.  
 There are instances of Christian apologists and teachers who use Esperanto as a medium. Nigerian pastor Bayo Afolaranmi's " Spirita nutraĵo " (spiritual food) Yahoo mailing list, for example, has hosted weekly messages since 2003.  
 
 Chick Publications , publisher of Protestant fundamentalist themed evangelistic tracts, has published a number of comic book style tracts by Jack T. Chick translated into Esperanto, including "This Was Your Life!" ("Jen Via Tuta Vivo!")  
 Islam  
 Ayatollah Khomeini of Iran called on Muslims to learn Esperanto and praised its use as a medium for better understanding among peoples of different religious backgrounds. After he suggested that Esperanto replace English as an international lingua franca , it began to be used in the seminaries of Qom . An Esperanto translation of the Qur'an was published by the state shortly thereafter.  
 Criticism  
 Main article: Criticism of Esperanto 
 Esperanto was conceived as a language of international communication, more precisely as a universal second language .  
 Since Esperanto is a planned language, there have been many criticisms of minor points.  or his choice of the Classic Greek and Old Latin singular and plural endings -o, -oj, -a, -aj over their Medieval contractions -o, -i, -a, -e. (Both these changes were adopted by the Ido reform, though Ido dispensed with adjectival agreement altogether.) Some more common examples of general criticism include the following: 
 
 Esperanto has not yet achieved the hopes of its founder to become a universal second language. Although many promoters of Esperanto stress the successes it has had, the fact remains that well over a century since its publication, the Esperanto-speaking community remains comparatively tiny with respect to the world population. In the case of the United Kingdom , for instance, Esperanto is rarely taught in schools, because it is regarded by the government as not meeting the needs of the national curriculum .  
 The vocabulary and grammar are based on major European languages, and are not universal. Simultaneously, the vocabulary, diacritic letters,  
 Either that Esperanto has no native culture,  
 The vocabulary is too large. Rather than deriving new words from existing roots, large numbers of new roots are adopted into the language with the intent of being internationally accommodating when in reality the language only caters to European languages. This makes the language more difficult for non-Europeans than it needs to be.  
 Esperanto asymmetry in gender formation makes it sexist .  from which Riism derived. 
 Esperanto is, looks, and/or sounds artificial. This criticism is often due to the letters with circumflex diacritics, which some find odd or cumbersome.  In Culture and Value , Ludwig Wittgenstein said:
 
 Esperanto. The feeling of disgust we get if we utter an invented word with invented derivative syllables. The word is cold, lacking in associations, and yet it plays at being ‘language’. A system of purely written signs would not disgust us so much.  
 
 
 
 Modifications  
 Main article: Esperantido 
 Though Esperanto itself has changed little since the publication of the Fundamento de Esperanto (Foundation of Esperanto), a number of reform projects have been proposed over the years, starting with Zamenhof's proposals in 1894 and Ido in 1907. Several later constructed languages, such as Universal , were based on Esperanto. 
 In modern times, attempts have been made to eliminate perceived sexism in the language. One example of this is Riism . However, as Esperanto has become a living language, changes are as difficult to implement as in ethnic languages. 
 Eponymous entities  
 There are many geographical and astronomical features named after Esperanto, or after its creator L. L. Zamenhof. These include Esperanto Island in Zed Islands off Livingston Island ,  and the asteroids 1421 Esperanto and 1462 Zamenhof discovered by Finnish astronomer and Esperantist Yrjö Väisälä . 
 See also  
 
 Listen to this article ( info/dl )
 
 
 Sorry, your browser either has JavaScript disabled or does not have any supported player. 
You can download the clip or download a player to play the clip in your browser. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 This audio file was created from a revision of the " Esperanto " article dated 2010-08-18, and does not reflect subsequent edits to the article. ( Audio help ) 
 More spoken articles 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 Esperanto portal 
 
 
  
 Language portal 
 
 
 
 
 Akademio de Esperanto 
 Distributed Language Translation 
 Color argument 
 Comparison between Esperanto and Ido 
 Comparison between Esperanto and Interlingua 
 Comparison between Esperanto and Novial 
 Encyclopedia of Esperanto 
 EoLA 
 ESP-Disk 
 Esperantic Studies Foundation 
 Esperanto library 
 Esperanto magazine 
 Esperanto Wikipedia 
 Esperantology 
 Esperantujo 
 Lernu! 
 Indigenous Dialogues 
 North American Summer Esperanto Institute 
 Semajno de Kulturo Internacia 
 
 References  
 
 
 ^  a   b  Lindstedt, Jouko. "Re: Kiom?" (posting). DENASK-L@helsinki.fi , 22 April 1996. 
 ^  Esperanto reference at Ethnologue (17th ed., 2013) 
 ^  Zasky, Jason (2009-07-20), "Discouraging Words" , Failure Magazine , "But in terms of invented languages, it’s the most outlandishly successful invented language ever. It has thousands of speakers—even native speakers—and that’s a major accomplishment as compared to the 900 or so other languages that have no speakers. - Arika Okrent" &#160; 
 ^  "La programo de la Kleriga lundo en UK 2013" . Universala Esperanto Asocio . Retrieved 6 January 2014 . &#160; 
 ^  "User locations" . Pasporta Servo . Retrieved 6 January 2014 . &#160; . 
 ^  Official European CEFR papers in Esperanto . 
 ^  a   b   "Akademio Internacia de la Sciencoj (AIS) San-Marino" . Ais-sanmarino.org . Retrieved 2010-12-05 . &#160; 
 ^  YouTube: Learn Esperanto first: Tim Morley at TEDxGranta 
 ^  http://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/List_of_Wikipedias 
 ^  http://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/List_of_Wikipedias_by_language_group#Indo-European-based_Constructed_.28340.2C659_.E2.80.93_1.3.25.29 
 ^  Brants, Thorsten (February 22, 2012). "Tutmonda helplingvo por ĉiuj homoj" . Google Translate Blog . Google . Retrieved August 14, 2012 . &#160; 
 ^  Grin Report, page 81 "Thus Flochon (2000: 109) notes that 'the Institute of Cybernetic Education of Paderborn (Germany) has compared the learning times of several groups of French-speaking baccalauréat students to reach an equivalent "standard" level in four different languages: Esperanto, English, German and Italian. The results are as follows: to reach this level, 2000 hours of German study produce a linguistic level equivalent to 1500 hours of English study, 1000 hours of Italian study and ... 150 hours of Esperanto study.' No comment." Other estimates scattered in the literature confirm faster achievement in target language skills in Esperanto than in all the other languages with which the comparison has been made (Ministry of Education , 1995) as well as propaedeutic benefits of Esperanto (Corsetti and La Torre, 1995)." 
 ^  The letter is quoted in Esperanto: The New Latin for the Church and for Ecumenism , by Ulrich Matthias. Translation from Esperanto by Mike Leon and Maire Mullarney 
 ^  "Esperanto" . Ling.ohio-state.edu. 2003-01-25 . Retrieved 2010-12-05 . &#160; 
 ^  Musgrave, George Clarke. Under Four Flags for France , 1918, p. 8 
 ^  Sutton, Geoffrey (2008). Concise Encyclopedia of the Original Literature of Esperanto, 1887-2007 . Mondial. ISBN &#160; 978-1-59569-090-6 . ""Hitler specifically attacked Esperanto as a threat in a speech in Munich (1922) and in Mein Kampf itself (1925). The Nazi Minister for Education banned the teaching of Esperanto on 17 May 1935....all Esperantists were essentially enemies of the state, serving through their language Jewish-internationalist aims" (pages 161–162)" &#160; 
 ^  "About ESW and the Holocaust Museum" . Esperantodc.org. 1995-12-05 . Retrieved 2010-12-05 . &#160; 
 ^  Lins, Ulrich (1988). Die gefährliche Sprache . Gerlingen: Bleicher. p.&#160;112. ISBN &#160; 3883500232 . &#160; 
 ^  a   b  Lins, Ulrich (2008). "Esperanto as language and idea in China and Japan" (PDF). Language Problems and Language Planning (John Benjamins) 32 (1): 47–60. doi : 10.1075/lplp.32.1.05lin . ISSN &#160; 0272-2690 . Retrieved July 2, 2012 . &#160; 
 ^  a   b   "Donald J. Harlow, The Esperanto Book, chapter 7" . Donh.best.vwh.net . Retrieved 2010-12-05 . &#160; 
 ^  http://www.marxists.org/archive/trotsky/1940/xx/stalin/ch04.htm 
 ^  La utilización del esperanto durante la Guerra Civil Española , Toño del Barrio and Ulrich Lins . Paper for the International Congress on the Spanish Civil War, (Madrid, 27–29 November 2006). 
 ^  "Esperanto, an official language of the European Union, now!" online petition 
 ^  " ' 'The Maneuver Enemy'' website" . Kafejo.com. 2004-06-02 . Retrieved 2010-12-05 . &#160; 
 ^  "Unesco and Esperanto" . Uea.org. 2010-06-08 . Retrieved 2010-12-05 . &#160; 
 ^  http://worldservice.org/doc.html World Government Documents (Personal), World Service Authority website 
 ^  Blank, Detlev (1985). Internationale Plansprachen. Eine Einführung ("International Planned Languages. An Introduction") . Akademie-Verlag. ISSN 0138-55 X. &#160; 
 ^  Kalocsay &amp; Waringhien (1985) Plena analiza gramatiko de Esperanto , §17, 22 
 ^  These letters occasionally have these values in English as well, for example the j in hallelu j ah , J arlsberg , or J ägermeister , and the c in the name of composer Pendere c ki , Czech president Vá c lav Havel , or the mineral letovicite . 
 ^  EK 
 ^  Esperanta Klavaro(Windows Phone) 
 ^  Maire Mullarney Everyone's Own Language , p147, Nitobe Press, Channel Islands, 1999 
 ^  "Esperanto en universitatoj" . Uea.Org. 2003-04-17 . Retrieved 2010-12-05 . &#160; 
 ^  "enhavo" . Web.archive.org. 2009-10-27. Archived from the original on 2009-10-27 . Retrieved 2010-12-05 . &#160; 
 ^  "Elte Btk" . Webcitation.org . Retrieved 2010-12-05 . &#160; 
 ^  Diploma in Interlinguistics (Esperanto) - Adam Mickiewicz University 
 ^  PLS 27/08 (Senate) . 
 ^  PL-6162/2009 (Chamber of Deputies) . 
 ^  Entidades manifestam apoio à proposta de incluir ensino de Esperanto na grade de disciplinas da rede pública (Portuguese) Agência Senado 
 ^  "Is Esperanto four times easier to learn?" . Esperanto-USA . Retrieved 2010-12-05 . &#160; 
 ^  Piron, Claude: "The hidden perverse effect of the current system of international communication" , published lecture notes 
 ^  Flochon, Bruno, 2000, «&#160;L'espéranto&#160;», in Gauthier, Guy (ed.) Langues: une guerre à mort, Panoramiques. 4e trim. 48: 89-95. Cited in François Grin, L'enseignement des langues étrangères comme politique publique (French) 
 ^  "Springboard to Languages" . Springboard2languages.org . Retrieved 2010-12-05 . &#160; 
 ^  Report: Article in Enciklopedio de Esperanto , volume I, p.436, on the pedagogic value of Esperanto. 
 ^  Report: Christian Rudmick, The Wellesley College Danish-Esperanto experiment . 
 ^  Report: Edward Thorndike, Language Learning . Bureau of Publications of Teachers College, 1933. Interlingua.org 
 ^  Helen S. Eaton, "The Educational Value of an Artificial Language." The Modern Language Journal , #12, pp. 87-94 (1927). Blackwellpublishing.com 
 ^  Protocols of the annual November meetings in Paderborn "Laborkonferencoj: Interlingvistiko en Scienco kaj Klerigo" (Working conference: Interlinguistics in Science and Education), which can be obtained from the Institute of Pedagogic Cybernetics in Paderborn. Also in the works by Frank, Lobin, Geisler, and Meder. 
 ^  Study International Language (known as Esperanto) Commission, Interministerial Decree April 29/October 5, 1993, Italian ministry of public instruction. 
 ^  Study Monash University EKPAROLI project home page 
 ^  Williams, N. (1965) 'A language teaching experiment', Canadian Modern Language Review 22.1: 26-28 
 ^  Andrew Norman. "home" . Web.archive.org . Retrieved 2010-12-05 . &#160; 
 ^  Byram, Michael (2001). Routledge Encyclopedia of Language Teaching and Learning . Routledge. p.&#160;464. ISBN &#160; 0-415-33286-9 . &#160; 
 ^  a   b  Sikosek, Ziko M. Esperanto Sen Mitoj ("Esperanto without Myths"). Second edition. Antwerp: Flandra Esperanto-Ligo, 2003. 
 ^  a   b   "Ethnologue report for language code:epo" . Ethnologue.com . Retrieved 2010-12-05 . &#160; 
 ^  "Afrika Agado" . Pagesperso-orange.fr . Retrieved 2010-12-05 . &#160; 
 ^  Culbert, Sidney S. Three letters about his method for estimating the number of Esperanto speakers , scanned and HTMLized by David Wolff 
 ^  "Number of Esperantists (methods)" . Panix.com . Retrieved 2010-12-05 . &#160; 
 ^  An Update on Esperanto , Universala Esperanto-Asocio (World Esperanto Association) 
 ^  "Popolnombradoj donas indikon pri la kvanto de esperantistoj&#160;— Libera Folio" (in (Esperanto) ). Liberafolio.org . Retrieved 2010-12-05 . &#160; 
 ^  "Population by knowledge of languages" . Nepszamlalas.hu . Retrieved 2010-12-05 . &#160; 
 ^  Jouko Lindstedt (January 2006). Native Esperanto as a Test Case for Natural Language (PDF). University of Helsinki &#160;– Department of Slavonic and Baltic Languages and Literatures. &#160; 
 ^  Esperanto reference at Ethnologue (15th ed., 2005) 
 ^  Esperanto reference at Ethnologue (16th ed., 2009) 
 ^  http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/culture/2013-11/18/c_132897910.htm 
 ^  Esperanto Koresponda Servo ("Esperanto Pen Pal Service"). Retrieved March 29, 2008. 
 ^  Ziko van Dijk. Sed homoj kun homoj: Universalaj Kongresoj de Esperanto 1905–2005 . Rotterdam: UEA, 2005. 
 ^  Szilvási László. "International Esperanto meetings" . Eventoj.hu . Retrieved 2010-12-05 . &#160; 
 ^  Kaj Tiel Plu Esperanto folk music as downloadable MP3 file 
 ^  Auld, William. La Fenomeno Esperanto ("The Esperanto Phenomenon"). Rotterdam: Universala Esperanto-Asocio, 1988. 
 ^  a   b  Peter Glover Forster (1982). The Esperanto Movement . Walter de Gruyter. p.&#160;181. ISBN &#160; 978-90-279-3399-7 . &#160; 
 ^  "Akademio Internacia de la Sciencoj rande de pereo" . Libera Folio (in Esperanto). 2011-09-05 . Retrieved July 1, 2012 . &#160; 
 ^  Frank, Helmar ; Fössmeier, Reinhard (2000). AIS&#160;— La Akademio Internacia de la Sciencoj San Marino / Die Internationale Akademie der Wissenschaften San Marino . Institut für Kybernetik. p.&#160;449. ISBN &#160; 9783929853124 . &#160; Cite uses deprecated parameters ( help ); |accessdate= requires |url= ( help ) 
 ^  "PARIS BUSINESS MEN WOULD USE ESPERANTO; Chamber of Commerce Committee Finds It Useful as a Code in International Trade." . The New York Times . February 16, 1921 . Retrieved October 22, 2013 . &#160; 
 ^  "Esperanto" by Mark Feeney. The Boston Globe , 12 May 1999 
 ^  "Kion Signifas Raŭmismo" , by Giorgio Silfer. 
 ^  "Prague Manifesto" (English version). Universala Esperanto-Asocio, updated 2003-03-26. 
 ^  Esperanto flag , flagspot.net 
 ^  "Esperanto flag: The jubilee symbol" . Fotw.net . Retrieved 2010-12-05 . &#160; 
 ^  "Esperanto flag" . Fotw.net . Retrieved 2010-12-05 . &#160; 
 ^  "The Oomoto Esperanto portal" . Oomoto.or.jp . Retrieved 2010-12-05 . &#160; 
 ^  "The Baha'i Faith and Esperanto" . Bahaa Esperanto-Ligo ( B.E.L. ) . Retrieved 2006-08-26 . &#160; 
 ^  Smith, Peter (2000). "Zamenhof, Lidia". A concise encyclopedia of the Bahá'í Faith . Oxford: Oneworld Publications. p.&#160;368. ISBN &#160; 1-85168-184-1 . &#160; 
 ^  (Portuguese) O Espiritismo e o Esperanto (Spiritism and Esperanto) 
 ^  "Uma só língua, uma só bandeira, um só pastor: Spiritism and Esperanto in Brazil by David Pardue" (PDF). University of Kansas Libraries . Retrieved 2006-08-26 . &#160; 
 ^  "La Sankta Biblio&#160;– "Londona text " " . Retrieved 2006-08-26 . &#160; 
 ^  Eric Walker (May 27, 2005). "Esperanto Lives On". The Friend . &#160; 
 ^  Botten J. The Captive Conscience 2002 p.110 re. Esperanto speaking Christadelphians in Tsarist Russia. 
 ^  "Internacia Biblio-Misio" . Biblio-misio.org . Retrieved 2010-12-05 . &#160; 
 ^  Bayo Afolaranmi. "Spirita nutraĵo" . Retrieved 2006-09-13 . &#160; 
 ^  "Esperanto "This Was Your Life " " . Chick.com . Retrieved 2010-12-05 . &#160; 
 ^  a   b   "Esperanto&#160;– Have any governments opposed Esperanto?" . Donald J. Harlow . Retrieved 2006-08-26 . &#160; 
 ^  "Esperanto in Iran (in Persian)" . Porneniu . Retrieved 2006-08-26 . &#160; 
 ^  "Esperanto.org" . Esperanto.org . Retrieved 2010-12-05 . &#160; 
 ^  "Christopherculver.com" . Christopherculver.com . Retrieved 2010-12-05 . &#160; 
 ^  There have been a number of attempts to reform the language, the most well-known of which is the language Ido which resulted in a schism in the community at the time, beginning in 1907. See "Why Ido?" The International Language of Ido. 18 March 2008. 4 February 2009 Idolinguo.org.uk. 
 ^  a   b  "Why Ido?" The International Language of Ido. 18 Mach 2008. 4 February 2009 Idolinguo.org . 
 ^  Who, What, Why? (2008-07-16). "Bbc News" . BBC News . Retrieved 2010-12-05 . &#160; 
 ^  Claude Piron, Linguistic Communication: A Comparative Field Study , studies about problems in learning languages 
 ^  C.E. King, A.S. Bryntsev, F.D. Sohn, Report on the implications of additional languages in the United Nations system, Geneva: UN, Joint Inspection Unit, 1977, document A/32/237 
 ^  a   b   "Is Esperanto's vocabulary bloated?" . Rickharrison.com . Retrieved 2010-12-05 . &#160; 
 ^  "Lojban" . Neptune.spaceports.com. 2004-03-01 . Retrieved 2010-12-05 . &#160; 
 ^  "What is Esperanto?" . Langsuuage-learning-advisor.com . Retrieved 2010-12-05 . &#160; 
 ^  a   b   c   "Critiche all'esperanto ed alle altre lingue internazionali" . Parracomumangi.altervista.org . Retrieved 2010-12-05 . &#160; 
 ^  Europe's Babylon  
 ^  La Bona Lingvo , Claude Piron . Vienna: Pro Esperanto, 1989. La lingvo volas eleganti, ne elefanti. "The language wants to be elegant, not elephantine." 
 ^  "Ĉi-tiu Esperanto estus turka..." , Renato Corsetti. 2007. 
 ^  'Seksaj vortoj' , Bertilo Wennergren, Plena Manlibro de Esperanta Gramatiko 
 ^  Camacho, Jorge. Sur la linio. Rakontoj kaj noveloj de Georgo Kamaĉo. Enkonduko de Fernando de Diego.&#160;– Berkeley&#160;: Eldonejo Bero, 1991 . 
 ^  Claude Piron cites and replies to several such criticisms in his Le Défi des Langues (Paris: L'Harmattan, 1994). 
 ^  Laŭ la komuna opinio de gvidaj fakuloj de la Instituto, Esperanto apartenas al la kategorio de vivaj lingvoj. Pli detale traktante la temon, konsiderante la historion kaj la nunan staton de Esperanto, a.) ĝi estas grandmezure normigita, b.) amplekse sociiĝinta, c.) ne-etna viva lingvo, kiu en sekundara lingva komunumo plenumas ĉiujn eblajn lingvajn funkciojn, kaj samtempe ĝi funkcias kiel pera lingvo.&#160;– Ĉi supre diritaj respegulas la sciencan starpunkton de nia Instituto. "Malgranda fina venko". El Hungario 
 ^  "Wittgenstein on Esperanto" . The Autodidact Project . Retrieved 2012-07-17 . &#160; 
 ^  Composite Gazetteer of Antarctica: Esperanto Island 
 
 
 Further reading  
 
 Emily van Someren. Republication of the thesis 'The EU Language Regime, Lingual and Translational Problems'. 
 Ludovikologia dokumentaro I Tokyo: Ludovikito, 1991. Facsimile reprints of the Unua Libro in Russian, Polish, French, German, English and Swedish, with the earliest Esperanto dictionaries for those languages. 
 Fundamento de Esperanto . HTML reprint of 1905 Fundamento , from the Academy of Esperanto. 
 Esperanto Lessons . Including the alphabet, adjectives, nouns, plural, gender, numbers, phrases, grammar, vocabulary, verbs, exam, audio, and translation. 
 Auld, William. La Fenomeno Esperanto ("The Esperanto Phenomenon"). Rotterdam: Universala Esperanto-Asocio, 1988. 
 Butler, Montagu C. Step by Step in Esperanto . ELNA 1965/1991. ISBN 0-939785-01-3 . 
 DeSoto, Clinton (1936). 200 Meters and Down . West Hartford, Connecticut, US: American Radio Relay League , p.&#160;92. 
 Crystal, David, article "Esperanto" in The New Penguin Encyclopedia , Penguin Books, 2002. 
 Crystal, David, How Language Works (pages 424-5), Penguin Books, 2006. ISBN 978-0-14-101552-1 . 
 Everson, Michael . The Alphabets of Europe: Esperanto &#160;PDF&#160;(25.4&#160;KB) . Evertype, 2001. 
 Forster, Peter G. The Esperanto Movement . The Hague: Mouton Publishers, 1982. ISBN 90-279-3399-5 . 
 Gledhill, Christopher. The Grammar of Esperanto: A Corpus-Based Description. Second edition. Lincom Europa, 2000. ISBN 3-89586-961-9 . 
 Harlow, Don. The Esperanto Book . Self-published on the web (1995–96). 
 Okrent, Arika. In the Land of Invented Languages . 
 Wells, John . Lingvistikaj aspektoj de Esperanto ("Linguistic aspects of Esperanto"). Second edition. Rotterdam: Universala Esperanto-Asocio, 1989. 
 Zamenhof, Ludovic Lazarus, Dr. Esperanto's International Language: Introduction &amp; Complete Grammar The original 1887 Unua Libro , English translation by Richard H. Geoghegan; HTML online version 2006. Print edition (2007) also available from ELNA or UEA . 
 
 External links  
 
 
 
 Esperanto edition of Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 
 Find more about Esperanto at Wikipedia's sister projects 
 
 
  
 Definitions and translations from Wiktionary 
 
 
  
 Media from Commons 
 
 
  
 News stories from Wikinews 
 
 
  
 Quotations from Wikiquote 
 
 
  
 Source texts from Wikisource 
 
 
  
 Textbooks from Wikibooks 
 
 
  
 Travel guide from Wikivoyage 
 
 
  
 Learning resources from Wikiversity 
 
 
 
 Esperanto on the Open Directory Project 
 UEA.org - Website of the World Esperanto Association 
 Lernu! 
 Esperanto Bookshelf at Project Gutenberg 
 Esperanta babilejo - Esperanto chat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 t 
 e 
 
 
 Constructed languages (conlangs) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Types and concepts 
 
 
 
 Artistic language 
 Constructed script 
 Engineered language 
 Fictional language 
 International auxiliary language (IAL) 
 Language game 
 Musical language 
 Relexification 
 Universal language 
 Zonal language 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Conlangs 
 
 
 
 Afrihili 
 Atlantean 
 Balaibalan 
 Blissymbols 
 Brithenig 
 Damin 
 Dothraki 
 Enochian 
 Esperanto 
 Glosa 
 Idiom Neutral 
 Ido 
 Interlingua 
 Ithkuil ( Ilaksh ) 
 Kalaba-X 
 Kēlen 
 Klingon 
 Láadan 
 Languages of Middle-earth 
 Langue nouvelle (1765) 
 Lingua Franca Nova 
 Lingua Ignota 
 Loglan 
 Lojban 
 Na'vi 
 Nadsat 
 Nal Bino 
 Neo 
 Novial 
 Occidental 
 Quenya 
 Ro 
 Sambahsa 
 Sindarin 
 Slovianski 
 Solresol 
 Sona 
 Spokil 
 Talossan 
 Teonaht 
 Toki Pona 
 Tsolyáni 
 Uropi 
 Valyrian 
 Verdurian 
 Volapük 
 Wenedyk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Resources 
 
 
 
 Codes for constructed languages 
 Conlanger 
 Language Creation Conference 
 Language Creation Society 
 Zompist.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Portal 
 WikiProject 
 List of constructed languages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       



 								 
				Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Esperanto&amp;oldid=598198719 "				 
												 Categories : Languages with ISO 639-2 code Languages with ISO 639-1 code Esperanto Agglutinative languages Constructed languages International auxiliary languages 1887 introductions  Hidden categories: Articles with Esperanto-language external links Pages containing cite templates with deprecated parameters Pages using citations with accessdate and no URL Articles with Portuguese-language external links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2010 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2013 Articles with hAudio microformats All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from July 2013 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2012 Articles containing Esperanto-language text Articles with unsourced statements from April 2010 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2013 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2009 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2009 Spoken articles Articles with Open Directory Project links  												 
							 
		 
		 
			 Navigation menu 
			 
				 
	 Personal tools 
	 
 Create account Log in 	 
 
				 
					 
	 Namespaces 
	 
					 Article 
					 Talk 
			 
 
 
	 
		 
	 Variants 
	 
		 
					 
	 
 
				 
				 
					 
	 Views 
	 
					 Read 
					 Edit 
					 View history 
			 
 
 
	 Actions 
	 
		 
					 
	 
 
 
	 Search 
	 
					 
					 		 
	 
 
				 
			 
			 
					 
				 
	 Navigation 
	 
		 
			 Main page 
			 Contents 
			 Featured content 
			 Current events 
			 Random article 
			 Donate to Wikipedia 
			 Wikimedia Shop 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Interaction 
	 
		 
			 Help 
			 About Wikipedia 
			 Community portal 
			 Recent changes 
			 Contact page 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Tools 
	 
		 
			 What links here 
			 Related changes 
			 Upload file 
			 Special pages 
			 Permanent link 
			 Page information 
			 Data item 
 Cite this page 		 
	 
 
 
	 Print/export 
	 
		 
			 Create a book 
			 Download as PDF 
			 Printable version 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Languages 
	 
		 
			 Afrikaans 
			 Alemannisch 
			 አማርኛ 
			 Ænglisc 
			 Аҧсшәа 
			 العربية 
			 Aragonés 
			 Arpetan 
			 Asturianu 
			 Avañe'ẽ 
			 Aymar aru 
			 Azərbaycanca 
			 Bamanankan 
			 Bân-lâm-gú 
			 Башҡортса 
			 Беларуская 
			 Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ 
			 Bikol Central 
			 Български 
			 Boarisch 
			 Bosanski 
			 Brezhoneg 
			 Буряад 
			 Català 
			 Чӑвашла 
			 Cebuano 
			 Čeština 
			 Cymraeg 
			 Dansk 
			 Deutsch 
			 Dolnoserbski 
			 Eesti 
			 Ελληνικά 
			 Español 
			 Esperanto 
			 Euskara 
			 فارسی 
			 Fiji Hindi 
			 Føroyskt 
			 Français 
			 Frysk 
			 Fulfulde 
			 Gaeilge 
			 Gàidhlig 
			 Galego 
			 Gĩkũyũ 
			 𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺 
			 客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî 
			 Хальмг 
			 한국어 
			 Hausa 
			 Hawai`i 
			 Հայերեն 
			 हिन्दी 
			 Hornjoserbsce 
			 Hrvatski 
			 Ido 
			 Ilokano 
			 Bahasa Indonesia 
			 Interlingua 
			 Interlingue 
			 ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ/inuktitut 
			 Ирон 
			 IsiZulu 
			 Íslenska 
			 Italiano 
			 עברית 
			 Kalaallisut 
			 ಕನ್ನಡ 
			 ქართული 
			 Kaszëbsczi 
			 Қазақша 
			 Kinyarwanda 
			 Kirundi 
			 Kiswahili 
			 Коми 
			 Kurdî 
			 Ladino 
			 Лезги 
			 Latina 
			 Latviešu 
			 Lëtzebuergesch 
			 Lietuvių 
			 Ligure 
			 Limburgs 
			 Lojban 
			 Lumbaart 
			 Magyar 
			 Македонски 
			 Malagasy 
			 മലയാളം 
			 मराठी 
			 მარგალური 
			 مصرى 
			 مازِرونی 
			 Bahasa Melayu 
			 Mirandés 
			 Мокшень 
			 Монгол 
			 Nāhuatl 
			 Nederlands 
			 नेपाली 
			 日本語 
			 Нохчийн 
			 Norsk bokmål 
			 Norsk nynorsk 
			 Nouormand 
			 Novial 
			 Occitan 
			 Oʻzbekcha 
			 ਪੰਜਾਬੀ 
			 Pälzisch 
			 پنجابی 
			 Piemontèis 
			 Tok Pisin 
			 Plattdüütsch 
			 Polski 
			 Português 
			 Qırımtatarca 
			 Ripoarisch 
			 Română 
			 Rumantsch 
			 Runa Simi 
			 Русиньскый 
			 Русский 
			 Саха тыла 
			 Sámegiella 
			 संस्कृतम् 
			 Sardu 
			 Scots 
			 Shqip 
			 Sicilianu 
			 සිංහල 
			 Simple English 
			 SiSwati 
			 Slovenčina 
			 Slovenščina 
			 Словѣньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟ 
			 Ślůnski 
			 Soomaaliga 
			 کوردی 
			 Српски / srpski 
			 Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски 
			 Suomi 
			 Svenska 
			 Tagalog 
			 தமிழ் 
			 Татарча/tatarça 
			 ไทย 
			 Тоҷикӣ 
			 Türkçe 
			 Українська 
			 اردو 
			 ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche 
			 Vahcuengh 
			 Vèneto 
			 Vepsän kel’ 
			 Tiếng Việt 
			 Volapük 
			 Võro 
			 Walon 
			 文言 
			 West-Vlams 
			 Winaray 
			 Wolof 
			 吴语 
			 ייִדיש 
			 Yorùbá 
			 粵語 
			 Zeêuws 
			 Žemaitėška 
			 中文 
			 
			 Edit links 
		 
	 
 
			 
		 
		 
							 
											 This page was last modified on 5 March 2014 at 02:09. 
											 Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. 
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
									 
							 
											 Privacy policy 
											 About Wikipedia 
											 Disclaimers 
											 Contact Wikipedia 
											 Developers 
											 Mobile view