German language - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 





 
 
		 
		 
		 
			 
			 
						 
						 German language 
			 
								 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
								 
												 
					Jump to:					 navigation , 					 search 
				 
				 
 
 German 
 
 
 Deutsch , Deutsche Sprache 
 
 
 Pronunciation 
  
 
 
 Native&#160;to 
 Primarily in German-speaking Europe , as a minority language and amongst the German diaspora worldwide 
 
 
 
 Native speakers 
 
 Standard German: 90 million &#160;(2010)  
all varieties of German: 120 million (1990–2005)  
 L2 speakers: 80 million (2006)  
 
 
 
 Language family 
 
 
 Indo-European 
 
 Germanic 
 
 West Germanic 
 
 High German 
 
 German 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Early forms 
 
 
 Old High German 
 
 Middle High German 
 
 Early New High German 
 
 German 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Writing system 
 
 Latin ( German alphabet ) 
 German Braille 
 
 
 
 Signed form(s) 
 
 Signed German , LBG 
 (Lautsprachbegleitende/Lautbegleitende Gebärden) 
 
 
 Official status 
 
 
 
 Official language&#160;in 
 
 
 &#160; European Union 
 (official and working language) 
 
 &#160; Germany 
 &#160; Austria 
 &#160;&#160; Switzerland 
 &#160; Liechtenstein 
 &#160; Luxembourg 
 &#160; Belgium ( German-speaking Community of Belgium ) 
 
 
 
 Recognised minority language&#160;in 
 
 
 &#160; Czech Republic  
 &#160; Denmark  
 &#160; Hungary  
 &#160; Kazakhstan  
 &#160; Italy ( South Tyrol only) 
 &#160; Ukraine 
 &#160; Namibia ( National language ; official language 1984–90)  
 &#160; Poland ( Auxiliary language )  
 &#160; Romania  
 &#160; Russia  
 &#160; Slovakia (Official municipal language of Krahule/Blaufuß )  
 &#160; Slovenia (First or second foreign language taught in most schools) 
 &#160; Croatia 
 &#160; Serbia 
 &#160; Brazil (Co-official municipal language in Pomerode and other municipalities)  
 &#160; South Africa  
 &#160;&#160; Vatican City (Administrative and commanding language of the Swiss Guard )  
 &#160; Venezuela ( Colonia Tovar )  
 
 
 Regulated&#160;by 
 
 No official regulation 
(German orthography regulated by the Council for German Orthography  ). 
 
 
 Language codes 
 
 
 ISO 639-1 
 de 
 
 
 ISO 639-2 
 ger &#160;(B) 
 deu &#160;(T) 
 
 
 ISO 639-3 
 Variously: 
 deu &#160;–&#160; New High German 
 gmh &#160;–&#160; Middle High German 
 goh &#160;–&#160; Old High German 
 gct &#160;–&#160; Alemán Coloniero 
 bar &#160;–&#160; Austro-Bavarian 
 cim &#160;–&#160; Cimbrian 
 geh &#160;–&#160; Hutterite German 
 ksh &#160;–&#160; Kölsch 
 nds &#160;–&#160; Low German 
 sli &#160;–&#160; Lower Silesian 
 ltz &#160;–&#160; Luxembourgish 
 vmf &#160;–&#160; Main-Franconian 
 mhn &#160;–&#160; Mócheno 
 pfl &#160;–&#160; Palatinate German 
 pdc &#160;–&#160; Pennsylvania German 
 pdt &#160;–&#160; Plautdietsch 
 swg &#160;–&#160; Swabian German 
 gsw &#160;–&#160; Swiss German 
 uln &#160;–&#160; Unserdeutsch 
 sxu &#160;–&#160; Upper Saxon 
 wae &#160;–&#160; Walser German 
 wep &#160;–&#160; Westphalian 
 
 
 Linguasphere 
 52-AC (Continental West Germanic) &gt; 52-ACB (Deutsch &amp; Dutch) &gt; 
52-ACB-d ( Central German incl. 52-ACB–dl &amp; -dm Standard/Generalised High German ) + 52-ACB-e &amp; -f ( Upper German &amp; Swiss German ) + 52-ACB-g ( Yiddish ) + 52-ACB-h ( émigré German varieties incl. 
52-ACB-hc Hutterite German &amp; 52-ACB-he Pennsylvania German etc.) + 52-ACB-i ( Yenish ); totalling 285 varieties: 52-ACB-daa to 52-ACB-i 
 
 
  
 
 
 This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. 
 
 
 German ( Deutsch   &#160;(  listen ) ) is spoken natively by approximately 100 million people, making it one of the world's major languages . It is also the most widely spoken first language in the European Union . With the inclusion of the second-language speakers, the number of German speakers is about 200 million. 
 German is a West Germanic language and derives most of its vocabulary from the Germanic branch of the Indo-European language family.  A number of words are derived from Latin and Greek , and fewer from French and English. Widely spoken languages which are most similar to German include Luxembourgish , Yiddish , Dutch , the Frisian languages and English . 
 It is written using the Latin alphabet . In addition to the 26 standard letters, German has three vowels with umlauts (Ä/ä, Ö/ö, and Ü/ü) and the letter ß (a special kind of "s", called "Eszett" or "scharfes Es"). 
 German is a pluricentric language , with multiple countries having their own standardised variants (e.g. Austrian German , Swiss Standard German ). There is also one variant referred to as Standard German . 
 German is the only official language of Germany , Austria and Liechtenstein , one of the official languages of Switzerland , Luxembourg and Belgium and a recognised minor language in many countries such as Italy , Slovenia , Hungary , Namibia and Poland . 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 1.1 Origins 
 1.2 Modern German 
 
 1.2.1 Germany 
 1.2.2 The Austrian empire 
 1.2.3 Switzerland 
 1.2.4 Standardization 
 
 
 
 
 2 Geographic distribution 
 
 2.1 Europe 
 2.2 Africa 
 2.3 North America 
 2.4 South America 
 2.5 Oceania 
 
 
 3 Standard German 
 
 3.1 Official status 
 3.2 German as a foreign language 
 
 
 4 Dialects 
 
 4.1 Low German 
 4.2 High German 
 4.3 Varieties of standard German 
 
 
 5 Grammar 
 
 5.1 Noun inflection 
 5.2 Verb inflection 
 5.3 Word order 
 
 
 6 Vocabulary 
 7 Orthography 
 
 7.1 Present 
 7.2 Past 
 7.3 Reform of 1996 
 
 
 8 Phonology 
 
 8.1 Vowels 
 8.2 Consonants 
 
 8.2.1 Consonant shifts 
 
 
 
 
 9 Literature 
 10 German loanwords in the English language 
 11 Organisations 
 
 11.1 Goethe Institut 
 11.2 Deutsche Welle 
 11.3 DicForAll 
 
 
 12 See also 
 13 References 
 14 Bibliography 
 15 External links 
 
 
 
 History  
 Main article: History of German 
 Origins  
 
 
 
  
The Germanic-speaking area of the Holy Roman Empire around 962. 
 
 
 The history of the language begins with the High German consonant shift during the migration period , separating Old High German dialects from Old Saxon . The earliest evidence of Old High German is from scattered Elder Futhark inscriptions, especially in Alemannic , from the 6th century AD; the earliest glosses ( Abrogans ) date to the 8th; and the oldest coherent texts (the Hildebrandslied , the Muspilli and the Merseburg Incantations ) to the 9th century. Old Saxon at this time belongs to the North Sea Germanic cultural sphere, and Low Saxon was to fall under German rather than Anglo-Frisian influence during the Holy Roman Empire . 
 As Germany was divided into many different states , the only force working for a unification or standardization of German for several hundred years was the general wish of writers to be understood by as many readers as possible. 
 Modern German  
 Germany  
 
 
 
  
 
 This section does not cite any references or sources . Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . (November 2013) 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The widespread popularity of the Bible translated into German by Martin Luther helped establish modern German 
 
 
 When Martin Luther translated the Bible (the New Testament in 1522 and the Old Testament , published in parts and completed in 1534), he based his translation mainly on the bureaucratic standard language used in Saxony ( sächsische Kanzleisprache ), also known as Meißner-Deutsch (German from the city of Meissen ). This language was based on Eastern Upper and Eastern Central German dialects and preserved much of the grammatical system of Middle High German (unlike the spoken German dialects in Central and Upper Germany, which had already at that time begun to lose the genitive case and the preterite tense). 
 Copies of the Bible featured a long list of glosses for each region that translated words unknown in the region into the regional dialect. Roman Catholics initially rejected Luther's translation and tried to create their own Catholic standard ( gemeines Deutsch )—the difference in relation to "Protestant German" was only minor. It was not until the middle of the 18th century that a widely accepted standard was created, thus ending the period of Early New High German . 
 Until about 1800, standard German was mainly a written language: in urban northern Germany , the local dialects of Low Saxon or Low German were spoken; Standard German , which was markedly different, was often learned as a foreign language with uncertain pronunciation. Northern German pronunciation were considered the standard in prescriptive pronunciation guides; however, the actual pronunciation of Standard German varies from region to region. 
 The Austrian empire  
 
 
 
  
Ethnolinguistic map of Austria–Hungary , 1910. 
 
 
 German was the language of commerce and government in the Habsburg Empire , which encompassed a large area of Central and Eastern Europe. Until the mid-19th century it was essentially the language of townspeople throughout most of the Empire. Its use indicated that the speaker was a merchant , an urbanite, irrespective of nationality. Some cities, such as Prague (German: Prag ) and Budapest ( Buda , German: Ofen ), were gradually Germanized in the years after their incorporation into the Habsburg domain. Others, such as Pozsony (German: Pressburg , now Bratislava ), were originally settled during the Habsburg period and were primarily German at that time. A few cities remained mainly non-German. However most cities, such as Prague, Budapest, Bratislava, Zagreb (German: Agram ), and Ljubljana (German: Laibach ), were primarily German during this time, although surrounded by territory where other languages were spoken. In the eastern provincies Banat and Transylvania there were not only the greater towns - such as Temeswar (Timisoara), Hermannstadt (Sibiu) and Kronstadt (Brasov) - German speaking, but also many smaller localities in the surrounding areas. 
 Switzerland  
 
 
 
  
linguistic map of Switzerland, 2000 
 
 
 In Switzerland, a number of local dialects are spoken in the German-speaking cantons, but (the Swiss variety of) Standard German is used as a written language. It is one of the main languages, along with French, Italian and Romansh. 
 Standardization  
 In 1901, the 2nd Orthographical Conference ended with a complete standardization of the German language in its written form while the Deutsche Bühnensprache (literally, German stage language) had established rules for German three years earlier. 
 Media and written works are now almost all produced in Standard German (often called Hochdeutsch ("High German")) which is understood in all areas where German is spoken. 
 The most comprehensive guide to the vocabulary of the German language is found within the Deutsches Wörterbuch . This dictionary was created by the Brothers Grimm and is composed of 16 parts, which were issued between 1852 and 1860 . In 1860, grammatical and orthographic rules first appeared in the Duden Handbook . In 1901, this was declared the standard definition of the German language. Official revisions of some of these rules were not issued until 1996, when a controversial spelling reform was officially promulgated by governments of all German-speaking countries. 
 Geographic distribution  
 Main article: German diaspora 
 German-speaking communities can be found in the former German colony of Namibia , independent from South Africa since 1990, as well as in other destinations of German emigration such as the USA, Canada , Mexico , Dominican Republic , Brazil , Argentina, Paraguay , Uruguay , Chile , Peru , Venezuela (where the dialect Alemán Coloniero developed), Jordan,  South Africa and Australia . In Namibia, German Namibians retain German educational institutions. 
 According to W3Techs , 6.0% of websites are written in German,  making it the third most used language on the Internet. 
 
 
 
  
Examples of German language in Namibian everyday life 
 
 
 
 
 Country 
 German speaking population (outside Europe)  
 
 
 &#160; US 
 7006500000000000000 5,000,000 
 
 
 &#160; Canada 
 7005450000000000000 450,000 
 
 
 &#160; Brazil 
 7006140000000000000 1,400,000 
 
 
 &#160; Argentina 
 7005250000000000000 250,000 
 
 
 &#160; Mexico 
 7005200000000000000 200,000 
 
 
 &#160; Australia 
 7005110000000000000 110,000 
 
 
 &#160; South Africa 
 7004750000000000000 75,000 (German expatriate citizens alone)  
 
 
 &#160; Chile 
 7004500000000000000 50,000 
 
 
 &#160; Paraguay 
 7004300000000000000 30,000 
 
 
 &#160; New Zealand 
 7004375000000000000 37,500 
 
 
 &#160; Namibia 
 7004300000000000000 30,000 (German expatriate citizens alone)  
 
 
 &#160; Venezuela 
 7004100000000000000 10,000 
 
 
 Europe  
 Main articles: German-speaking Europe and German as a minority language 
 
 
 
  
Knowledge of the German language in Europe and nearby countries. 
 
 
 German is primarily spoken in Germany (where it is the first language for more than 95% of the population), Austria (89%), Switzerland (65%), the majority of Luxembourg , and Liechtenstein - the latter being the only state with German as the sole official and spoken language. 
 German is also one of the three official languages of Belgium , alongside Dutch and French . Speakers are primarily concentrated within the German-speaking Community region in eastern Belgium, and form about 1% of the country's population. 
 Other European German-speaking communities are found in Northern Italy (in South Tyrol and in some municipalities in other provinces), in the French regions of Alsace and Lorraine , and in some border villages of the former South Jutland County of Denmark . 
 German-speaking communities can also be found in parts of the Czech Republic , Slovakia , Hungary , Poland , Romania , Serbia , Russia and Kazakhstan . Forced expulsions after World War II and massive emigration to Germany in the 1980s and 1990s have depopulated most of these communities. 
 Africa  
 Main article: German language in Namibia 
 German is spoken by about 25-30,000 people as a mother tongue in the former German colony of Namibia . Though it no longer enjoys status as an official language, it is used in a wide variety of spheres, especially business and tourism, as well as churches (most notably the German-speaking Evangelical Lutheran Church in Namibia (GELK) ), schools (e.g., the Deutsche Höhere Privatschule Windhoek ), literature (German-Namibian authors include Giselher W. Hoffmann ), radio (German-language programming of the Namibian Broadcasting Corporation ), and music (e.g., artist EES ). 
 There are a number of communities where German is spoken in South Africa , especially in and around Wartburg . 
 North America  
 Main articles: German in the United States , Pennsylvania German language , Plautdietsch , and Hutterite German 
 In the United States, the states of North Dakota and South Dakota are the only states where German is the most common language spoken at home after English (the second most spoken language in other states is Spanish, French or Tagalog ).  German geographical names can also be found throughout the Midwest region of the country, such as New Ulm and many other towns in Minnesota; Bismarck (North Dakota's state capital), Munich , Karlsruhe , and Strasburg in North Dakota; New Braunfels , Fredericksburg , Weimar, and Muenster in Texas; Corn (formerly Korn), Kiefer and Loyal (formerly Kiel) and Berlin in Oklahoma; and Kiel , Berlin , and Germantown in Wisconsin. 
 Between 1843 and 1910, more than 5 million Germans emigrated overseas,  A significant group of German Pietists in Iowa formed the Amana Colonies and continue to practice speaking their heritage language. Early twentieth century immigration was often to St. Louis , Chicago , New York , Milwaukee , Pittsburgh and Cincinnati . 
 
 
 
  
 German-language newspapers in the U.S. in 1922 
 
 
 The dialects of German which are or were primarily spoken in colonies or communities founded by German-speaking people resemble the dialects of the regions the founders came from. For example, Hutterite German resembles dialects of Carinthia . Texas German is a dialect spoken in the areas of Texas settled by the Adelsverein , such as New Braunfels and Fredericksburg. In the Amana Colonies in the state of Iowa, Amana German is spoken. Plautdietsch is a large minority language spoken in Northern Mexico by the Mennonite communities, and is spoken by more than 200,000 people in Mexico. Pennsylvania German is a West Central German dialect spoken by most of the Amish population of Pennsylvania, Ohio, and Indiana and resembles Palatinate German dialects. 
 Hutterite German is an Upper German dialect of the Austro-Bavarian variety of the German language, which is spoken by Hutterite communities in Canada and the United States. Hutterite is spoken in the U.S. states of Washington , Montana , North Dakota , South Dakota , and Minnesota ; and in the Canadian provinces of Alberta , Saskatchewan and Manitoba . Its speakers belong to some Schmiedleit, Lehrerleit, and Dariusleit Hutterite groups, but there are also speakers among the older generations of Prairieleit (the descendants of those Hutterites who chose not to settle in colonies). Hutterite children who grow up in the colonies learn to speak Hutterite German before learning English, the standard language of the surrounding areas, in school. Many of these children, though, continue with German Grammar School, in addition to public school, throughout a student's elementary education.  
 In Canada , there are 622,650 speakers of German according to the most recent census in 2006,  There is a large and vibrant community in the city of Kitchener, Ontario , which was at one point named Berlin. German immigrants were instrumental in the country's three largest urban areas: Montreal , Toronto , and Vancouver ; while post- Second World War immigrants managed to preserve a fluency in the German language in their respective neighborhoods and sections. In the first half of the 20ᵗʰ century, over a million German-Canadians made the language Canada's third most spoken after French and English . 
 In Mexico there are also large populations of German ancestry , mainly in the cities of: Mexico City , Puebla , Mazatlán , Tapachula , Ecatepec de Morelos , and larger populations scattered in the states of Chihuahua , Durango , and Zacatecas . 
 South America  
 In Brazil, the largest concentrations of German speakers are in the states of Rio Grande do Sul (where Riograndenser Hunsrückisch developed), Santa Catarina , Paraná , São Paulo and Espírito Santo . There are also important concentrations of German-speaking descendants in Argentina , Chile , Paraguay , Venezuela , Peru and Bolivia . In the 20th century, over 100,000 German political refugees and invited entrepreneurs settled in Latin America , in countries such as Costa Rica , Panama , Venezuela, and the Dominican Republic, to establish German-speaking enclaves, and reportedly there is a small German immigration to Puerto Rico . Nearly all inhabitants of the city of Pomerode , a municipality where this language is co-oficial  in the state of Santa Catarina in Brazil, can speak German. 
 In most locations where German immigrants settled, the vast majority of their descendents no longer speak German, as they have been largely assimilated into the host language and culture of the specific location of settlement; generally English in North America, and Spanish or Portuguese in Latin America. However, the Brazilian state Espírito Santo has Pomeranian and German as linguistic heritages officially approved statewide,  Moreover, some cities in Brazil have the German or Pomeranian as co-official languages. They are: 
 Municipalities that have co-official Pomeranian (or Pommersch ) language : 
 
 
 
  
 Municipalities where Pomeranian dialects are co-official in Espírito Santo , Brazil . 
 
 
 Espírito Santo : 
 
 Domingos Martins  
 Laranja da Terra  
 Pancas  
 Santa Maria de Jetibá  
 Vila Pavão  
 
 Minas Gerais : 
 
 Itueta (only in the district of Vila Nietzel )  
 
 Santa Catarina : 
 
 Pomerode  
 
 Rio Grande do Sul : 
 
 Canguçu (under approval)  
 
 Rondônia : 
 
 Espigão d'Oeste (under approval)  
 
 Municipalities that have co-official language Riograndenser Hunsrückisch language : 
 Santa Catarina : 
 
 Antônio Carlos  
 Treze Tílias (language teaching is compulsory in schools, standing on stage in public official of the municipality)  
 
 Rio Grande do Sul : 
 
 Santa Maria do Herval (under approval)  
 
 Oceania  
 In Australia , the state of South Australia experienced a pronounced wave of immigration in the 1840s from Prussia (particularly the Silesia region). With the prolonged isolation from other German speakers and contact with Australian English , a unique dialect known as Barossa German has developed and is spoken predominantly in the Barossa Valley near Adelaide . Usage of German sharply declined with the advent of World War I , due to the prevailing anti-German sentiment in the population and related government action. It continued to be used as a first language into the twentieth century but now its use is limited to a few older speakers.  
 German migration to New Zealand in the 19th century was less pronounced than migration from Britain, Ireland, and perhaps even Scandinavia. Despite this there were significant pockets of German speaking communities which lasted until the first decades of the 20th century. German-speakers settled principally in Puhoi , Nelson , and Gore . At the last census (2006), 37,500 people in New Zealand spoke German, making it the third most spoken European language after English and French and overall the ninth most spoken language. 
 There is also an important German creole being studied and recovered, named Unserdeutsch , spoken in the former German colony of German New Guinea , across Micronesia and in northern Australia (i.e. coastal parts of Queensland and Western Australia ), by a few elderly people. The risk of its extinction is serious and efforts to revive interest in the language are being implemented by scholars. 
 Standard German  
 Main article: Standard German 
 
 
 
  
The national and regional standard varieties of the German language.  
 
 
 Standard German originated not as a traditional dialect of a specific region, but as a written language . However, there are places where the traditional regional dialects have been replaced by standard German; this is the case in large stretches of Northern Germany , but also in major cities in other parts of the country. 
 Standard German differs regionally, between German-speaking countries, in vocabulary and some instances of pronunciation , and even grammar and orthography . This variation must not be confused with the variation of local dialects . Even though the regional varieties of standard German are only to a certain degree influenced by the local dialects, they are very distinct. German is thus considered a pluricentric language . 
 In most regions, the speakers use a continuum from more dialectal varieties to more standard varieties according to circumstances. 
 In the German-speaking parts of Switzerland , mixtures of dialect and standard are very seldom used, and the use of standard German is largely restricted to the written language. This situation has been called a medial diglossia . Swiss Standard German is used in the Swiss education system, while Austrian Standard German is officially used in the Austrian education system. 
 Official status  
 Standard German is the only official language in Liechtenstein; it shares official status in Germany (with Danish , Frisian , Romany and Sorbian as minority languages ), in Austria (with Slovene , Croatian , and Hungarian as minority languages), Switzerland (with French , Italian and Romansh ), Belgium (with Dutch and French) and Luxembourg (with French and Luxembourgish ). It is an official regional language in Italy ( South Tyrol ), as well as in the cities of Sopron (Hungary), Krahule ( Slovakia ) and several cities in Romania. It is the official language of command (together with Italian) of the Vatican Swiss Guard . 
 German has an officially recognized status as a regional or auxiliary language in Denmark  (Asowo and Halbstadt). 
 German is one of the 23 official languages of the European Union and one of the three working languages. It is the language with the largest number of native speakers in the European Union and is the second-most spoken language in Europe, just behind English and ahead of French . 
 German as a foreign language  
 Main article: German as a foreign language 
 
 
 
  
Knowledge of German as a foreign language ( second language in Luxembourg ) in the EU member states (+ Turkey ), in per cent of the adult population (+15), 2005. 
 
 
 German is the third most taught foreign language in the English-speaking world, after French and Spanish.  
 German is the main language of about 95  This is assisted by the widespread availability of German TV by cable or satellite. 
 Dialects  
 Main article: German dialects 
 
 
 
  
Distribution of the native speakers of major continental West-Germanic dialectal varieties.  
 
 
 German is a member of the West Germanic language of the Germanic family of languages , which in turn is part of the Indo-European language family . The German dialect continuum is traditionally divided most broadly into High German and Low German , also called Low Saxon . Yet, historically, High German dialects and Low Saxon/Low German dialects do not belong to the same language. Nevertheless, in today's Germany, Low Saxon/Low German is often perceived as a dialectal variation of Standard German on a functional level, even by many native speakers. The same phenomenon is found in the eastern Netherlands, as the traditional dialects are not always identified with their Low Saxon/Low German origins, but with Dutch.  
 The variation among the German dialects is considerable, with often only neighbouring dialects being mutually intelligible. Some dialects are not intelligible to people who only know standard German. However, all German dialects belong to the dialect continuum of High German and Low Saxon languages. 
 Low German  
 Main article: Low German 
 Middle Low German was the lingua franca of the Hanseatic League . It was the predominant language in Northern Germany. This changed in the 16th century: in 1534 the Luther Bible was published. This translation is considered to be an important step towards the evolution of the Early New High German . It aimed to be understandable to a broad audience and was based mainly on Central and Upper German varieties. The Early New High German language gained more prestige than Low German and became the language of science and literature. Around the same time, the Hanseatic league, based around northern ports, lost its importance as new trade routes to Asia and the Americas were established, while the most powerful German states of that period were located in Middle and Southern Germany. 
 The 18th and 19th centuries were marked by mass education in Standard German in schools. Gradually Low German came to be politically viewed as a mere dialect spoken by the uneducated. Today Low Saxon can be divided in two groups: Low Saxon varieties with a reasonable standard German influx  and varieties of Standard German with a Low Saxon influence known as Missingsch . Sometimes, Low Saxon and Low Franconian varieties are grouped together because both are unaffected by the High German consonant shift. However, the proportion of the population who can understand and speak it has decreased continuously since World War II . 
 High German  
 Main article: High German languages 
 High German is divided into Central German , High Franconian (a transitional dialect), and Upper German . Central German dialects include Ripuarian , Moselle Franconian , Rhine Franconian , Central Hessian , East Hessian , North Hessian , Thuringian , Silesian German , Lorraine Franconian , Mittelalemannisch , North Upper Saxon , High Prussian , Lausitzisch-Neumärkisch and Upper Saxon . It is spoken in the southeastern Netherlands, eastern Belgium, Luxembourg, parts of France, and parts of Germany roughly between the River Main and the southern edge of the Lowlands. Modern Standard German is mostly based on Central German, although the common (but not linguistically correct) German term for modern Standard German is Hochdeutsch , that is, High German. 
 The Moselle Franconian varieties spoken in Luxembourg have been officially standardised and institutionalised and are usually considered a separate language known as Luxembourgish . 
 The two High Franconian dialects are East Franconian and South Franconian . 
 Upper German dialects include Northern Austro-Bavarian , Central Austro-Bavarian , Southern Austro-Bavarian , Swabian , East Franconian , High Alemannic German , Highest Alemannic German , Alsatian and Low Alemannic German . They are spoken in parts of the Alsace, southern Germany, Liechtenstein, Austria, and the German-speaking parts of Switzerland and Italy. 
 Wymysorys is a High German dialect of Poland native to Wilamowice , and Sathmarisch and Siebenbürgisch are High German dialects of Romania. The High German varieties spoken by Ashkenazi Jews (mostly in the former Russian Empire ) have several unique features, and are usually considered as a separate language, Yiddish . It is the only Germanic language that does not use the Latin script as the basis of its standard alphabet . 
 Varieties of standard German  
 In German linguistics , German dialects are distinguished from varieties of standard German . 
 
 The German dialects are the traditional local varieties. They are traditionally traced back to the different German tribes.  Many of them are hardly understandable to someone who knows only standard German, since they often differ from standard German in lexicon , phonology and syntax . If a narrow definition of language based on mutual intelligibility is used, many German dialects are considered to be separate languages (for instance in the Ethnologue ). However, such a point of view is unusual in German linguistics. 
 The varieties of standard German refer to the different local varieties of the pluricentric standard German. They only differ slightly in lexicon and phonology. In certain regions, they have replaced the traditional German dialects, especially in Northern Germany. 
 
 Grammar  
 Main article: German grammar 
 German is an inflected language with three grammatical genders ; as such, there can be a large number of words derived from the same root. 
 Noun inflection  
 
 
 
  
Declension of the German definite article, das ("the"). 
 
 
 German nouns inflect into: 
 
 four cases : nominative , genitive , dative , and accusative . 
 three genders : masculine, feminine, or neuter. Word endings sometimes reveal grammatical gender: for instance, nouns ending in ...ung (ing), ...schaft (-ship), ...keit or ...heit (-hood, -ness) are feminine, while nouns ending in ...chen or ...lein ( diminutive forms) are neuter and nouns ending in ...ismus ( -ism ) are masculine. Others are controversial, sometimes depending on the region in which it is spoken. Additionally, ambiguous endings exist, such as ...er ( -er ), e.g. Feier (feminine), celebration, party, Arbeiter (masculine), labourer, and Gewitter (neuter), thunderstorm. 
 two numbers: singular and plural 
 
 This degree of inflection is considerably less than that of Old High German and other old Indo-European languages such as Latin , Ancient Greek , or Sanskrit , and somewhat less than, for instance, that of Old English , modern Icelandic and Russian . The three genders have collapsed in the plural, which now behaves, grammatically, somewhat as a fourth gender. With four cases and three genders plus plural there are 16 distinct possible combinations of case and gender/number, but presently there are only six forms of the definite article used for the 16 possibilities. Inflection for case on the noun itself is required in the singular for strong masculine and neuter nouns, in the genitive, and sometimes in the dative. Both of these cases are losing ground to substitutes in informal speech . The dative ending is considered somewhat old-fashioned in many contexts and is often dropped, but it is still used in proverbs and the like, in formal speech, and in written language. Weak masculine nouns share a common case ending for genitive, dative and accusative in the singular. Feminine nouns are not declined in the singular. The plural does have an inflection for the dative. In total, seven inflectional endings (not counting plural markers) exist in German: -s, -es, -n, -ns, -en, -ens, -e . 
 In German orthography, nouns and most words with the syntactical function of nouns are capitalised, with the purpose of making it easier for readers to determine the function of a word within a sentence ( Am Freitag ging ich einkaufen. —"On Friday I went shopping."; Eines Tages kreuzte er endlich auf. —"One day he finally showed up.") This convention is almost unique to German today (shared perhaps only by the closely related Luxemburgish language and several insular dialects of the North Frisian language ), although it was historically common in other languages such as Danish and English. 
 Like most Germanic languages, German forms noun compounds where the first noun modifies the category given by the second, for example: Hundehütte ("dog hut"; specifically: "dog kennel"). Unlike English, where newer compounds or combinations of longer nouns are often written in "open" with separating spaces, German (like some other Germanic languages) nearly always uses the "closed" form without spaces, for example: Baumhaus ("tree house"). German allows arbitrarily long compounds, as English does to some extent. (See also English compounds .) In German these are quite common. The longest German word verified to be actually in (albeit very limited) use is Rindfleischetikettierungsüberwachungsaufgabenübertragungsgesetz , which, literally translated, is "beef labelling supervision duty assignment law" . However, examples like this are perceived as excessively bureaucratic, stylistically awkward, and even satiric by native speakers. 
 Verb inflection  
 Main article: German verbs 
 Inflection of standard German verbs includes: 
 
 two main conjugation classes: weak and strong (as in English). Additionally, there is a third class, known as mixed verbs, whose conjugation combines features of both the strong and weak patterns. 
 three persons : 1st, 2nd, 3rd. 
 two numbers : singular and plural 
 three moods : indicative , imperative , subjunctive (in addition to infinitive) 
 two voices : active and passive; the passive voice uses auxiliary verbs and is dividable into static and dynamic.  
 two tenses without auxiliary verbs ( present , preterite ) and four tenses constructed with auxiliary verbs ( perfect , pluperfect , future and future perfect ) 
 the distinction between grammatical aspects is rendered by combined use of subjunctive and/or preterite marking: thus the plain indicative voice uses neither of those two markers; the subjunctive by itself conveys second-hand information  ; subjunctive plus preterite marks the conditional state; and the preterite alone shows either plain indicative (in the past), or functions as a (literal) alternative for either second-hand-information or the conditional state of the verb, when necessary for clarity. 
 the distinction between perfect and progressive aspect is and has at every stage of development been a productive category of the older language and in nearly all documented dialects, but, strangely enough, is nowadays rigorously excluded from written usage in its present normalised form. 
 disambiguation of completed vs. uncompleted forms is widely observed and regularly generated by common prefixes ( blicken - to look, erblicken - to see ). 
 
 
 Verb prefixes 
 
 The meaning of basic verbs can be expanded, and sometimes radically changed, through the use of a number of prefixes. Some prefixes have a specific meaning; the prefix zer- refers to destruction, as in zer reißen (to tear apart), zer brechen (to break apart), zer schneiden (to cut apart). Other prefixes have only the vaguest meaning in themselves; ver- is found in a number of verbs with a large variety of meanings, as in ver suchen (to try) from "suchen" (to seek), ver nehmen (to interrogate) from "nehmen" (to take), ver teilen (to distribute) from "teilen" (to share), ver stehen (to understand) from "stehen" (to stand). 
 Other examples include haften (to stick), ver haften (to detain); kaufen (to buy), ver kaufen (to sell); hören (to hear), auf hören (to cease); fahren (to drive), er fahren (to experience). 
 Many German verbs have a separable prefix, often with an adverbial function. In finite verb forms this is split off and moved to the end of the clause, and is hence considered by some to be a "resultative particle". For example, mitgehen meaning "to go along" would be split, giving Gehen Sie mit? (Literal: "Go you with?"&#160;; Formal: "Are you going along?"). 
 Indeed, several parenthetical clauses may occur between the prefix of a finite verb and its complement: e.g. 
 
 Er kam am Freitagabend nach einem harten Arbeitstag und dem üblichen Ärger, der ihn schon seit Jahren immer wieder an seinem Arbeitsplatz plagt, mit fraglicher Freude auf ein Mahl, das seine Frau ihm, wie er hoffte, bereits aufgetischt hatte, endlich zu Hause an . 
 
 A selectively literal translation of this example to illustrate the point might look like this: 
 
 He "came" on Friday evening, after a hard day at work and the usual annoyances that had time and again been troubling him for years now at his workplace, with questionable joy, to a meal which, as he hoped, his wife had already put on the table, finally at home "on". 
 
 Word order  
 Word order is generally less rigid than in Modern English. There are two common word orders : one is for main clauses and another for subordinate clauses . In normal affirmative sentences the inflected verb always has position 2. In polar questions, exclamations, and wishes it always has position 1. In subordinate clauses the verb occurs at the very end. 
 German requires that a verbal element (main verb or auxiliary verb ) appear second in the sentence . The verb is preceded by the topic of the sentence. The element in focus appears at the end of the sentence. For a sentence without an auxiliary this gives, amongst other options: 
 
 Der alte Mann gab mir gestern das Buch. (The old man gave me yesterday the book; normal order) 
 Das Buch gab mir gestern der alte Mann. (The book gave  me yesterday the old man) 
 Das Buch gab der alte Mann mir gestern. (The book gave the old man  me yesterday) 
 Das Buch gab mir der alte Mann gestern. (The book gave  me the old man yesterday) 
 
 
 Gestern gab mir der alte Mann das Buch. (Yesterday gave  me the old man the book, normal order) 
 Mir gab der alte Mann das Buch gestern. ( me gave the old man the book yesterday (entailing: as for you, it was another date)) 
 
 The position of a noun in a German sentence has no bearing on its being a subject, an object, or another argument. In a declarative sentence in English if the subject does not occur before the predicate the sentence could well be misunderstood. This is not the case in German. Given the possibilities to write a sentence in more than one way, allows to highlight specific words/nouns: 
 normal Word order: 
 
 
 
 „Der Direktor betrat gestern um 10 Uhr mit einem Schirm in der Hand sein Büro“ 
 The warden entered yesterday at 10 o'clock with an umbrella in the hand his office. 
 
 
 
 Object in front: 
 
 
 
 „Sein Büro betrat der Direktor gestern um 10 Uhr mit einem Schirm in der Hand“. 
 His office entered the warden yesterday at 10 o'clock with an umbrella in the hand 
 
 
 The object „Sein Büro“ (his office) is hereby highlighted, it could be the topic of the next sentence. 
 
 Timeadverb in front: 
 
 
 
 „Gestern betrat der Direktor um 10 Uhr mit einem Schirm in der Hand sein Büro“. 
 Yesterday entered the warden at 10 o'clock with an umbrella in the hand his office. 
 
 
 The second timeadverb „um 10 Uhr“ (at 10o'clock) , is lightly accentuated. 
 
 Timeadverbs in front: 
 
 
 
 „Gestern um 10 Uhr betrat der Direktor mit einem Schirm in der Hand sein Büro“. 
 Yesterday at 10 o'clock entered the warden with an umbrella in the hand his office. 
 
 
 The time specification „Gestern um 10 Uhr“(Yesterday at 10 o'clock) is highlighted. 
 
 Another possibility: 
 
 
 
 „Gestern um 10 Uhr betrat der Direktor sein Büro mit einem Schirm in der Hand". 
 Yesterday at 10 o'clock the warden entered his office with an umbrella in his hand. 
 
 
 Both, the time specification „Gestern um 10 Uhr“(Yesterday at 10 o'clock) and the fact he carries an umbrella are accenutated. 
 
 Swapped adverbs: 
 
 
 
 „Der Direktor betrat mit einem Schirm in der Hand gestern um 10 Uhr sein Büro“. 
 The warden entered with an umbrella in the hand yesterday at 10 o'clock his office. 
 The part of the sentence with „mit einem Schirm in der Hand“ (with an umbrella in the hand) is highlighted 
 
 
 
 Swapped Object: 
 
 
 
 „Der Direktor betrat gestern um 10 Uhr sein Büro mit einem Schirm in der Hand“. 
 The warden entered yesterday at 10 o'clock his office with an umbrella in his hand. 
 
 
 The time specification and the object „sein Büro“(his office) are lightly accentuated. 
 
 The possibility to use different kind of word orders also broaden the options to use language "tools"(for example poetic meter and Figures of speech ) more freely.) 
 
 Auxiliary verbs 
 
 When an auxiliary verb is present, the auxiliary appears in second position, and the main verb appears at the end. This occurs notably in the creation of the perfect . Many word orders are still possible, e.g.: 
 
 Der alte Mann hat mir heute das Buch gegeben. (The old man has given me the book today.) 
 Das Buch hat der alte Mann mir heute gegeben. (The book has the old man given me today.) 
 Heute hat der alte Mann mir das Buch gegeben. (Today the old man has given me the book.) 
 
 
 Modal verbs 
 
 Sentences using modal verbs place the infinitive at the end. For example, the sentence in Modern English "Should he go home?" would be rearranged in German to say "Should he (to) home go?" ( Soll er nach Hause gehen? ). Thus in sentences with several subordinate or relative clauses the infinitives are clustered at the end. Compare the similar clustering of prepositions in the following English sentence: "What did you bring that book which I don't like to be read to out of up for?" 
 
 Multiple infinitives 
 
 German subordinate clauses have all verbs clustered at the end. Given that auxiliaries encode future , passive , modality , and the perfect , this can lead to very long chains of verbs at the end of the sentence. In these constructions, the past participle in ge- is often replaced by the infinitive. 
 Man nimmt an, dass der Deserteur wohl erschossen V worden psv sein perf sollte mod 
One suspects that the deserter probably shot become be should 
("It is suspected that the deserter probably should have been shot") 
 The order at the end of such strings is subject to variation, though the latter version is unusual. 
 Er wusste nicht, dass der Agent einen Nachschlüssel hatte machen lassen 
He knew not that the agent a picklock had make let 
 Er wusste nicht, dass der Agent einen Nachschlüssel machen lassen hatte 
He knew not that the agent a picklock make let had 
 ("He did not know that the agent had had a picklock made") 
 Vocabulary  
 
 
 
  
 Duden Universal Wörterbuch 
 
 
 Most German vocabulary is derived from the Germanic branch of the Indo-European language family. However, there is a significant amount of loanwords from other languages, in particular from Latin , Greek , Italian , French  
 Latin words were already imported into the predecessor of the German language during the Roman Empire and underwent all the characteristic phonetic changes in German. Their origin is thus no longer recognizable for most speakers (e.g. Pforte , Tafel , Mauer from Latin porta , tabula , murus ). Borrowing from Latin continued after the fall of the Roman Empire during Christianization, mediated by the church and monasteries. Another important influx of Latin words can be observed during Renaissance humanism . In a scholarly context, the borrowings from Latin have continued until today, in the last decades often indirectly through borrowings from English. During the 15th to 17th centuries, the influence of Italian was great, leading to many Italian loanwords in the fields of architecture, finance, and music. The influence of the French language in the 17th to 19th centuries resulted in an even greater import of French words. The English influence was already present in the 19th century, but did not become dominant until the second half of the 20th century. 
 At the same time, the effectiveness of the German language in forming equivalents for foreign words from its inherited Germanic stem repertory is great.  It is claimed that this would also help in spreading modern or scientific notions among the less educated, and thus democratise public life, too. 
 As in English, there are many pairs of synonyms due to the enrichment of the Germanic vocabulary with loanwords from Latin and Latinized Greek. These words often have different connotations from their Germanic counterparts and are usually perceived as more scholarly. 
 
 Historie - "historical", (Geschichte, geschichtlich) 
 Humanität - "humaneness", (Menschlichkeit) 
 Millennium - "millennium", (Jahrtausend) 
 Perzeption - "perception", (Wahrnehmung) 
 Vokabular - "vocabulary", (Wortschatz) 
 
 The size of the vocabulary of German is difficult to estimate. The Deutsches Wörterbuch ( The German Dictionary ) initiated by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm already contained over 330,000 headwords in its first edition. The modern German scientific vocabulary is estimated at nine million words and word groups (based on the analysis of 35 million sentences of a corpus in Leipzig, which as of July 2003 included 500 million words in total).  
 Orthography  
 Main articles: German orthography , German alphabet , and German braille 
 
 
 
  
German alphabet in handwritten conventions 
 
 
 German is written in the Latin alphabet. In addition to the 26 standard letters, German has three vowels with Umlaut , namely ä , ö and ü , as well as the Eszett or scharfes s (sharp s), ß . In Switzerland "ss" is used instead of "ß". Additionally, when written in capitals, "ß" is replaced with "SS" in Germany, while in Austria it is traditionally replaced with "SZ" (like in Hungarian); there are some exceptions to these rules (see below). 
 Written texts in German are easily recognisable as such by distinguishing features such as umlauts and certain orthographical features—German is the only major language that capitalizes all nouns—and the frequent occurrence of long compounds. The longest German word that has been published is " Donaudampfschiffahrtselektrizitätenhauptbetriebswerkbauunterbeamtengesellschaft " made of 79 characters. Since legibility and convenience set certain boundaries, compounds consisting of more than three or four nouns are almost exclusively found in humorous contexts. 
 Present  
 Before the German spelling reform of 1996 , ß replaced ss after long vowels and diphthongs and before consonants, word-, or partial-word-endings. In reformed spelling, ß replaces ss only after long vowels and diphthongs. Since there is no capital ß , it is always written as "SS" when capitalization is required. For example, Maßband (tape measure) is capitalized MASSBAND . An exception is the use of ß in legal documents and forms when capitalizing names. To avoid confusion with similar names, a "ß" is to be used instead of "SS". (So: "KREßLEIN" instead of "KRESSLEIN".) A capital ß has been proposed and included in Unicode ("ẞ"; Unicode character U+1E9E), but it is not yet recognized as standard German. In Switzerland , ß is not used at all. 
 Umlaut vowels (ä, ö, ü) are commonly transcribed with ae, oe, and ue if the umlauts are not available on the keyboard or other medium used. In the same manner ß can be transcribed as ss. Some operating systems use key sequences to extend the set of possible characters to include, amongst other things, umlauts; in Microsoft Windows this is done using Alt codes . German readers understand those transcriptions (although they look unusual), but they are avoided if the regular umlauts are available because they are a makeshift, not proper spelling. (In Westphalia and Schleswig-Holstein, city and family names exist where the extra e has a vowel lengthening effect, e.g. Raesfeld  , but this use of the letter e after a/o/u does not occur in the present-day spelling of words other than proper nouns .) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 German alphabet 
 
 Sorry, your browser either has JavaScript disabled or does not have any supported player. 
You can download the clip or download a player to play the clip in your browser. 
 
 (Listen to a German speaker recite the alphabet in German) 
 
 
 
 
 Problems playing this file? See media help . 
 
 
 There is no general agreement on where letters with umlauts occur in the sorting sequence. Telephone directories treat them by replacing them with the base vowel followed by an e. Some dictionaries sort each umlauted vowel as a separate letter after the base vowel, but more commonly words with umlauts are ordered immediately after the same word without umlauts. As an example in a telephone book Ärzte occurs after Adressenverlage but before Anlagenbauer (because Ä is replaced by Ae). In a dictionary Ärzte comes after Arzt , but in some dictionaries Ärzte and all other words starting with Ä may occur after all words starting with A . In some older dictionaries or indexes, initial Sch and St are treated as separate letters and are listed as separate entries after S , but they are usually treated as S+C+H and S+T. 
 Written German also typically uses an alternative opening inverted comma ( quotation mark ) as in „ Guten Morgen !“. 
 Past  
 Further information: 2nd Orthographic Conference (German) ,&#160; Antiqua-Fraktur dispute ,&#160; German orthography reform of 1944 ,&#160;and&#160; German orthography reform of 1996 
 Until the early 20th century, German was mostly printed in blackletter typefaces (mostly in Fraktur , but also in Schwabacher ) and written in corresponding handwriting (for example Kurrent and Sütterlin ). These variants of the Latin alphabet are very different from the serif or sans serif Antiqua typefaces used today, and particularly the handwritten forms are difficult for the untrained to read. The printed forms however were claimed by some to be actually more readable when used for printing Germanic languages .  (Often, foreign names in a text were printed in a "normal" typeface even though the rest of the text was in Fraktur.) The Nazis initially promoted Fraktur and Schwabacher since they were considered Aryan , although they abolished them in 1941, claiming that these letters were Jewish. The Fraktur script remains present in everyday life in pub signs, beer brands and other forms of advertisement, where it is used to convey a certain rusticality and oldness. 
 A proper use of the long s , ( langes s ), ſ , is essential for writing German text in Fraktur typefaces. Many Antiqua typefaces include the long s also. A specific set of rules applies for the use of long s in German text, but nowadays it is rarely used in Antiqua typesetting. Any lower case "s" at the beginning of a syllable would be a long s, as opposed to a terminal s or short s (the more common variation of the letter s), which marks the end of a syllable; for example, in differentiating between the words Wachſtube (guard-house) and Wachstube (tube of floor polish). One can easily decide which "s" to use by appropriate hyphenation, ("Wach-ſtube" vs. "Wachs-tube"). The long s only appears in lower case . 
 Reform of 1996  
 Main article: German spelling reform of 1996 
 The spelling reform of 1996 led to public controversy and considerable dispute. The states ( Bundesländer ) of North Rhine-Westphalia and Bavaria would not accept it. The dispute landed at one point in the highest court, which made a short issue of it, claiming that the states had to decide for themselves and that only in schools could the reform be made the official rule—everybody else could continue writing as they had learned it. After 10 years, without any intervention by the federal parliament, a major revision was installed in 2006, just in time for the coming school year. In 2007, some traditional spellings were finally invalidated, while in 2008, on the other hand, many of the old comma rules were again put in force. 
 The most noticeable change was probably in the use of the letter ß , called scharfes s ( Sharp S ) or ess-zett (pronounced ess-tsett ). Traditionally, this letter was used in three situations: 1) after a long vowel or vowel combination, 2) before a t , and 3) at the end of a syllable, thus Füße , paßt , and daß . Currently only the first rule is in effect, thus Füße , passt , and dass . The word Fuß 'foot' has the letter ß because it contains a long vowel, even though that letter occurs at the end of a syllable. The logic of this change is that an 'ß' is a single letter whereas 'ss' obviously are two letters, so the same distinction applies as for instance between the words 'den' and 'denn'. 
 Phonology  
 Main article: German phonology 
 Vowels  
 
 
 Sorry, your browser either has JavaScript disabled or does not have any supported player. 
You can download the clip or download a player to play the clip in your browser. 
 
  
Spoken German in Goethe's Faust 
 
 
 In German, vowels (excluding diphthongs; see below) are either short or long , as follows: 
 
 
 
 A 
 Ä 
 E 
 I 
 O 
 Ö 
 U 
 Ü 
 
 
 short 
 /a/ 
 /ɛ/ 
 /ɛ/, /ə/ 
 /ɪ/ 
 /ɔ/ 
 /œ/ 
 /ʊ/ 
 /ʏ/ 
 
 
 long 
 /aː/ 
 /ɛː/ 
 /eː/ 
 /iː/ 
 /oː/ 
 /øː/ 
 /uː/ 
 /yː/ 
 
 
 Short /ɛ/ is realized as  , removing this anomaly. In that case, pairs like Bären/Beeren 'bears/berries' or Ähre/Ehre 'spike (of wheat)/honour' become homophonous. 
 In many varieties of standard German, an unstressed /ɛr/ is not pronounced  . 
 Whether any particular vowel letter represents the long or short phoneme is not completely predictable, although the following regularities exist: 
 
 If a vowel (other than i ) is at the end of a syllable or followed by a single consonant, it is usually pronounced long (e.g. Hof  ). 
 If a vowel is followed by h or if an i is followed by an e , it is long. 
 If the vowel is followed by a double consonant (e.g. ff , ss or tt ), ck , tz or a consonant cluster (e.g. st or nd ), it is nearly always short (e.g. hoffen  ). Double consonants are used only for this function of marking preceding vowels as short; the consonant itself is never pronounced lengthened or doubled, in other words this is not a feeding order of gemination and then vowel shortening . 
 
 Both of these rules have exceptions (e.g. hat  Lache 'manner of laughing' (colloquial) or lache! 'laugh!' (imperative). 
 German vowels can form the following digraphs (in writing) and diphthongs (in pronunciation); note that the pronunciation of some of them (ei, äu, eu) is very different from what one would expect when considering the component letters: 
 
 
 spelling 
 ai, ei, ay, ey 
 au 
 äu, eu 
 
 
 pronunciation 
 /aɪ̯/ 
 /aʊ̯/ 
 /ɔʏ̯/ 
 
 
 Additionally, the digraph ie generally represents the phoneme /iː/ , which is not a diphthong. In many varieties, an /r/ at the end of a syllable is vocalised. However, a sequence of a vowel followed by such a vocalised /r/ is not considered a diphthong: Bär  'words'. 
 In most varieties of standard German, syllables that begin with a vowel are preceded by a glottal stop  . 
 Consonants  
 With approximately 25 phonemes, the German consonant system exhibits an average number of consonants in comparison with other languages. One of the more noteworthy ones is the unusual affricate /p͡f/ . The consonant inventory of the standard language is shown below. 
 
 
 
 Bilabial 
 Labiodental 
 Alveolar 
 Postalveolar 
 Palatal 
 Velar 
 Uvular 
 Glottal 
 
 
 Plosive 
 p 3 &#160;&#160; b 4 
 
 t 3 &#160;&#160; d 4 
 
 
 k 3 &#160;&#160; ɡ 4 
 
 
 
 
 Affricate 
 
 pf 
 ts 
 tʃ &#160;&#160;( dʒ ) 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fricative 
 
 f &#160;&#160; v 
 s &#160;&#160; z 
 ʃ &#160;&#160;( ʒ ) 5 
 
 x 1 
 
 h 
 
 
 Nasal 
 m 
 
 n 
 
 
 ŋ 
 
 
 
 
 Approximant 
 
 
 l 
 
 j 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rhotic 
 
 
 r 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 /x/ has two allophones,  , after back and front vowels, respectively. 
 2 /r/ has three allophones in free variation:  is found in many varieties. 
 3 The voiceless stops /p/ , /t/ , /k/ are aspirated except when preceded by a sibilant , exactly as in English. 
 4 The voiced stops /b/ , /d/ , /ɡ/ are devoiced to /p/ , /t/ , /k/ , respectively, in word-final position. 
 5 /d͡ʒ/ and /ʒ/ occur only in words of foreign (usually English or French) origin. 
 Where a stressed syllable has an initial vowel, it is preceded by  is not considered a phoneme. 
 
 
 Consonant spellings 
 
 
 c standing by itself is not a German letter. In borrowed words, it is usually pronounced  (before a, o, u, and consonants). The combination ck is, as in English, used to indicate that the preceding vowel is short. 
 ch occurs most often and is pronounced either  , as particularly awkward and unusual. 
 dsch is pronounced  (like j in Jungle ) but appears in a few loanwords only. 
 f is pronounced  as in " f ather". 
 h is pronounced  as in " h ome" at the beginning of a syllable. After a vowel it is silent and only lengthens the vowel (e.g. Reh = roe deer ). 
 j is pronounced  ). In recent loanwords, it follows more or less the respective languages' pronunciations. 
 l is always pronounced  (the English " dark L "). 
 q only exists in combination with u and appears in both Germanic and Latin words ( quer ; Qualität ). The digraph qu is pronounced  . 
 r is usually pronounced in a guttural fashion (a voiced uvular fricative  ). 
 s in Germany, is pronounced  , respectively. 
 ß (a letter unique to German called scharfes S or Eszett ) was a ligature of a double s and of an sz and is always pronounced  
 sch is pronounced  (like "sh" in "shine"). 
 tion in Latin loanwords is pronounced  . 
 v is pronounced  the further you travel south. Some words, such as Ventil and the name Valentin (not, for example, Vase ) have reached a plain f in Bavaria and Swabia. 
 w is pronounced  ). 
 y only in loanwords, generally as a vowel. 
 z is always pronounced  ). A tz indicates that the preceding vowel is short. 
 
 Consonant shifts  
 For more details on this topic, see High German consonant shift . 
 German does not have any dental fricatives (as English th ). The th sounds, which the English language still has, disappeared on the continent in German with the consonant shifts between the 8th and the 10th centuries.  It is sometimes possible to find parallels between English and German by replacing the English th with d in German: "Thank" → in German "Dank", "this" and "that" → "dies" and "das", " thou " (old 2nd person singular pronoun) → "du", "think" → "denken", "thirsty" → "durstig" and many other examples. 
 Likewise, the gh in Germanic English words, pronounced in several different ways in modern English (as an f , or not at all), can often be linked to German ch : "to laugh" → lachen , "through" and "thorough" → durch , "high" → hoch , "naught" → nichts , "light" → leicht or Licht , "sight" → Sicht , "daughter" → Tochter , "neighbour" → Nachbar . 
 Literature  
 Main article: German literature 
 The German language is used in German literature and can be traced back to the Middle Ages , with the most notable authors of the period being Walther von der Vogelweide and Wolfram von Eschenbach . The Nibelungenlied , whose author remains unknown, is also an important work of the epoch. The fairy tales collections collected and published by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm in the 19th century became famous throughout the world. 
 Theologian Luther , who translated the Bible into German, is widely credited for having set the basis for the modern "High German" language. Among the most well known German poets and authors are Lessing , Goethe , Schiller , Kleist , Hoffmann , Brecht , Heine and Schmidt . Thirteen German speaking people have won the Nobel Prize in literature : Theodor Mommsen , Rudolf Christoph Eucken , Paul von Heyse , Gerhart Hauptmann , Carl Spitteler , Thomas Mann , Nelly Sachs , Hermann Hesse , Heinrich Böll , Elias Canetti , Günter Grass , Elfriede Jelinek and Herta Müller . 
 
 
 Johann Wolfgang von Goethe 
 (1749–1832) 
 Friedrich Schiller 
 (1759–1805) 
 Brothers Grimm 
 (1785–1863) 
 Thomas Mann 
 (1875–1955) 
 Hermann Hesse 
 (1877–1962) 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 German loanwords in the English language  
 For a list of German loanwords to English, see Category:German loanwords . 
 English has taken many loanwords from German, often without any change of spelling: 
 
 
 German word 
 English loanword 
 Meaning of German word 
 
 
 abseilen 
 abseil 
 to descend by rope / to fastrope 
 
 
 Angst 
 angst 
 fear 
 
 
 Ansatz 
 ansatz 
 onset / entry / math. approach 
 
 
 Anschluss 
 anschluss 
 connection / access / annexation 
 
 
 Automat 
 automat 
 automation / machine 
 
 
 Bildungsroman 
 bildungsroman 
 novel concerned with the personal development or education of the protagonist 
 
 
 Blitz 
 Blitz 
 flash / lightning 
 
 
 Bratwurst 
 bratwurst 
 fried sausage 
 
 
 Delikatessen 
 delikatessen /delicatessen 
 delicate / delicious food items 
 
 
 Doppelgänger 
 doppelgänger 
 lit. "double going/living person alive", look-alike of somebody 
 
 
 Edelweiß 
 edelweiss 
 edelweiss flower 
 
 
 Fest 
 fest 
 feast / celebration 
 
 
 Gedankenexperiment 
 Gedankenexperiment 
 thought experiment 
 
 
 Geländesprung 
 gelandesprung 
 ski jumping for distance on alpine equipment 
 
 
 Gemütlichkeit 
 gemuetlichkeit 
 snug feeling, cosiness, good nature, geniality 
 
 
 Gestalt 
 Gestalt 
 form or shape / creature / scheme; refers to a concept of 'wholeness' 
 
 
 Gesundheit! 
 Gesundheit! (Amer.) 
 health / bless you! (when someone sneezes) 
 
 
 Heiligenschein 
 heiligenschein 
 meteo. "holy shine" / halo 
 
 
 Hinterland 
 hinterland 
 lit. mil. "area behind the front-line": interior / backwoods 
 
 
 kaputt 
 kaput 
 out of order, not working (from French, être capot "to have made no tricks in card games", lit. "to be hoodwinked") 
 
 
 Katzenjammer 
 katzenjammer 
 lit. "cats' lament": hangover, crapulence 
 
 
 Kindergarten 
 kindergarten 
 lit. "children's garden" - nursery or preschool 
 
 
 Kitsch 
 kitsch 
 fake art, something produced exclusively for sale 
 
 
 Kraut 
 kraut 
 herb, cabbage in some dialects 
 
 
 Leitmotiv 
 leitmotif 
 guiding theme (the verb "leiten" means "to guide, to lead") 
 
 
 plündern (v.) 
 to plunder 
 lit. "taking goods by force" (original meaning "to take away furniture" shifted in German and was borrowed by English both during the Thirty Years War ) 
 
 
 Poltergeist 
 poltergeist 
 lit. "rumbling ghost" (artificial compound, not originally German) 
 
 
 Realpolitik 
 realpolitik 
 diplomacy based on practical objectives rather than ideals 
 
 
 Reich 
 reich 
 empire or realm 
 
 
 Rucksack 
 rucksack 
 backpack (Ruck→"Rücken" which means "back") 
 
 
 Sauerkraut 
 sauerkraut 
 shredded and salted cabbage fermented in its own juice 
 
 
 Schadenfreude 
 schadenfreude 
 taking pleasure in someone else's misfortune 
 
 
 Sprachraum 
 sprachraum 
 lit. "place/area/room of a language": area where a certain language is spoken 
 
 
 Über 
 uber 
 over, above 
 
 
 Übermensch 
 ubermensch 
 superhuman, "overman" 
 
 
 verklemmt 
 verklemmt 
 lit. "jammed": inhibited, uptight 
 
 
 Waldsterben 
 waldsterben 
 lit. "forest dieback", dying floral environment 
 
 
 Wanderlust 
 wanderlust 
 desire, pleasure, or inclination to travel or walk 
 
 
 Weltanschauung 
 weltanschauung 
 lit. "perception of the world": ideology 
 
 
 Wunderkind 
 wunderkind 
 lit. "wonder child": child prodigy, whiz kid 
 
 
 Zeitgeist 
 zeitgeist 
 lit. "spirit of the times": the spirit of the age; the trend at that time 
 
 
 Zugzwang 
 Zugzwang 
 chess term lit. "compulsion to move" 
 
 
 Organisations  
 The use and learning of the German language are promoted by a number of organisations. 
 Goethe Institut  
 Main article: Goethe Institut 
 
 
 
  
Goethe-Institut logo 
 
 
 The government-backed Goethe Institut  (named after the famous German author Johann Wolfgang von Goethe ) aims to enhance the knowledge of German culture and language within Europe and the rest of the world. This is done by holding exhibitions and conferences with German-related themes, and providing training and guidance in the learning and use of the German language. For example the Goethe Institut teaches the Goethe-Zertifikat German language qualification. 
 Deutsche Welle  
 Main article: Deutsche Welle 
 The German state broadcaster Deutsche Welle is the equivalent of the British BBC World Service and provides radio and television broadcasts in German and a 30 other languages across the globe.  Its German language services are tailored for German language learners by being spoken at slow speed. Deutsche Welle also provides an E-learning website to learn German. 
 DicForAll  
 Dicforall is a German-German and German-Persian online dictionary and is available on the internet since early 2011. The development of the application already started in the year 2010.The data from DicForAll come from Wiktionary and Wikimedia. 
 See also  
 
 
 Deutsch (disambiguation) (disambiguation page) 
 German as a minority language 
 German exonyms 
 German family name etymology 
 German in the United States 
 German language literature 
 German name 
 German placename etymology 
 German spelling reform of 1996 
 Germanism (linguistics) 
 List of German expressions in English 
 List of non-English-language newspapers in New South Wales#German language newspapers 
 List of pseudo-German words adapted to English 
 Missingsch 
 Names for the German language 
 Otto Basler 
 Umlaut , ß 
 Various terms used for Germans 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Language portal 
  Germany portal 
  Austria portal 
  Switzerland portal 
  European Union portal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 References  
 
 
 ^  "Världens 100 största språk 2010"  . Nationalencyklopedin . 2010 . Retrieved 12 February 2014 . &#160; (Swedish) 
 ^  a   b  Lewis, M. Paul, ed. (2009). Ethnologue: Languages of the World (16 ed.). Dallas, Texas: SIL International. &#160; 
 ^  a   b   National Geographic Collegiate Atlas of the World . Willard, Ohio: R.R Donnelley &amp; Sons Company. April 2006. pp.&#160;257–299. ISBN &#160; 978-0-7922-3662-7 . &#160; 
 ^  EUROPA - Allgemeine &amp; berufliche Bildung - Regional- und Minderheitensprachen der Europäischen Union - Euromosaik-Studie 
 ^  Support from the European Commission for measures to promote and safeguard regional or minority languages and cultures - The Euromosaic study: German in Denmark (engl.). Letzter Zugriff am 13. November 2009 
 ^  EC.europa.eu 
 ^  "KAZAKHSTAN: Special report on ethnic Germans" . Irinnews.org . Retrieved 2010-10-11 . &#160; 
 ^  "Deutsch in Namibia" (PDF) (in German). Supplement of the Allgemeine Zeitung. 2007-08-18 . Retrieved 2008-06-23 . &#160; 
 ^  "CIA World Fact book Profile: Namibia" cia.gov . Retrieved 2008-11-30. 
 ^  "Map on page of Polish Ministry of Interior and Administration (MSWiA)" . Retrieved 2010-03-15 . &#160; 
 ^  "SbZ - Deutsche Minderheit in Rumänien: "Zimmerpflanze oder Betreuungs-Objekt" - Informationen zu Siebenbürgen und Rumänien" . Siebenbuerger.de . Retrieved 2010-03-15 . &#160; 
 ^  "Geschichte" . Rusdeutsch.EU . Retrieved 2010-10-11 . &#160; 
 ^  EUROPA - Allgemeine &amp; berufliche Bildung - Regional- und Minderheitensprachen der Europäischen Union - Euromosaik-Studie 
 ^  Leis Municipais http://www.leismunicipais.com.br/twitter/222/legislacao/lei-2251-2010-pomerode-sc.html 
 ^  "Constitutional Court of South Africa - The Constitution" . Constitutionalcourt.org.za . Retrieved 2013-06-14 . &#160; 
 ^  Verein Deutsche Sprache e.V. (2006-06-15). "Wussten Sie, dass..." . Vds-ev.de . Retrieved 2012-01-25 . &#160; 
 ^  Ethnologue report for Alemán Coloniero 
 ^  "Rat für deutsche Rechtschreibung - Über den Rat" . Rechtschreibrat.ids-mannheim.de . Retrieved 2010-10-11 . &#160; 
 ^  European Commission (2004). "Many tongues, one family. Languages in the European Union" (PDF). Europa (web portal) . Retrieved 5 April 2013 . &#160; 
 ^  "Germans in Jordan - German expats in Jordan" . InterNations . InterNations GmbH. 2013 . Retrieved 19 December 2013 . &#160; 
 ^  "Usage of content languages for websites" . W3Techs.com. 2013-12-28 . Retrieved 2013-12-28 . &#160; 
 ^  a   b   c  Handwörterbuch des politischen Systems der Bundesrepublik (in German). Source lists "German expatriate citizens" only for Namibia and South Africa! 
 ^  "Table 5. Detailed List of Languages Spoken at Home for the Population 5 Years and Over by State: 2000" (PDF) . Retrieved 2010-03-15 . &#160; 
 ^  Henry Steele Commager (1961). " Immigration and American history: essays in honor of Theodore C. Blegen ". U of Minnesota Press. p.102. ISBN 0-8166-5735-1 
 ^  49.2 million German Americans as of 2005 according to the United States Census Bureau. "US demographic census" . Retrieved 2007-08-02 . &#160; ; the 1990 census gives 57.9 million, or 23.3% of the U.S. population. 
 ^  Documentary History of the United States Brewers' Association 
 ^  http://www.mla.org/cgi-shl/docstudio/docs.pl?map_data_results 
 ^  a   b   "Statistics Canada 2006" . 2.statcan.ca. 2010-01-06 . Retrieved 2010-03-15 . &#160; 
 ^  Pomerode institui língua alemã como co-oficial no Município. 
 ^  Patrimônio - Língua alemã 
 ^  O povo pomerano no ES 
 ^  Plenário aprova em segundo turno a PEC do patrimônio 
 ^  Emenda Constitucional na Íntegra 
 ^  ALEES - PEC que trata do patrimônio cultural retorna ao Plenário 
 ^  LEI 14.061 - DECLARA INTEGRANTE DO PATRIMÔNIO HISTÓRICO E CULTURAL DO ESTADO DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL A “LÍNGUA HUNSRIK”, DE ORIGEM GERMÂNICA 
 ^  LEI Nº 14.061, de 23 de julho de 2012 - Declara integrante do patrimônio histórico e cultural do estado do Rio Grande do Sul a língua hunsrik, de origem germânica 
 ^  "A escolarização entre descendentes pomeranos em Domingos Martins" (in Portuguese) . Retrieved 24 August 2011 . &#160; 
 ^  a   b   c   d   e   "O povo pomerano no ES" (in Portuguese) . Retrieved 24 August 2011 . &#160; 
 ^  a   b   "A co-oficialização da língua pomerana" (in Portuguese) . Retrieved 24 August 2011 . &#160; 
 ^  "Pomerano!?" (in Portuguese) . Retrieved 24 August 2011 . &#160; 
 ^  "No Brasil, pomeranos buscam uma cultura que se perde" (in Portuguese) . Retrieved 24 August 2011 . &#160; 
 ^  "Lei dispõe sobre a cooficialização da língua pomerana no município de Santa maria de Jetibá, Estado do Espírito Santo" (in Portuguese) . Retrieved 24 August 2011 . &#160; 
 ^  "Vila Pavão, Uma Pomerânia no norte do Espirito Santo" (in Portuguese) . Retrieved 24 August 2011 . &#160; 
 ^  "Descendentes de etnia germânica vivem isolados em área rural de Minas" (in Portuguese) . Retrieved 24 August 2011 . &#160; 
 ^  "Pomeranos em busca de recursos federais" (in Portuguese) . Retrieved 24 August 2011 . &#160; 
 ^  "Resistência cultural - Imigrantes que buscaram no Brasil melhores condições de vida, ficaram isolados e sem apoio do poder público" (in Portuguese) . Retrieved 12 November 2011 . &#160; 
 ^  "Pomerode institui língua alemã como co-oficial no Município." (in Portuguese) . Retrieved 21 August 2011 . &#160; 
 ^  "Vereadores propõem ensino da língua pomerana nas escolas do município" (in Portuguese) . Retrieved 21 August 2011 . &#160; 
 ^  "Ontem e hoje&#160;: percurso linguistico dos pomeranos de Espigão D'Oeste-RO" (in Portuguese) . Retrieved 24 August 2011 . &#160; 
 ^  "Sessão Solene em homenagem a Comunidade Pomerana" (in Portuguese) . Retrieved 24 August 2011 . &#160; 
 ^  "Percurso linguistico dos pomeranos de Espigão D Oeste-RO" (in Portuguese) . Retrieved 12 November 2011 . &#160; 
 ^  "Comunidade Pomerana realiza sua tradicional festa folclórica" (in Portuguese) . Retrieved 24 August 2011 . &#160; 
 ^  Cooficialização da língua alemã em Antônio Carlos 
 ^  "Vereadores de Treze Tílias se reuniram ontem" (in Portuguese) . Retrieved 21 August 2011 . &#160; 
 ^  TREZE TÍLIAS 
 ^  "Um pedaço da Aústria no Brasil" (in Portuguese). Treze Tílias . Retrieved 21 August 2011 . &#160; 
 ^  "Dialetos Hunsrik e Talian na ofensiva no Sul - Em Santa Maria do Herval, regiăo de Novo Hamburgo, RS, surge forte a mobilizaçăo em favor do Hunsrik - a faceta brasileira/latino-americana do Hunsrückisch. Em Serafina Correa, RS, floresce o talian " (in Portuguese) . Retrieved 24 August 2011 . &#160; 
 ^  Ulrich Ammon, Hans Bickel, Jakob Ebner, et al.: Variantenwörterbuch des Deutschen. Die Standardsprache in Österreich, der Schweiz und Deutschland sowie in Liechtenstein, Luxemburg, Ostbelgien und Südtirol. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin 2004. 
 ^  Euromosaic study: German in Denmark 
 ^  Modern Language Association , 2007-11-13, New MLA Survey Shows Significant Increases in Foreign Language Study at U.S. Colleges and Universities . Retrieved 2011-08-14. 
 ^  Marten, Thomas; Sauer, Fritz Joachim, eds. (2005). Länderkunde - Deutschland, Österreich, Schweiz und Liechtenstein im Querschnitt  (in German). Berlin: Inform-Verlag. p.&#160;7. ISBN &#160; 3-9805843-1-3 . &#160; 
 ^  After English; "Europeans and Language" (PDF). European Commission . 2005 . Retrieved 2007-12-08 . &#160; 
 ^  "Languages in Europe" . European Commission . 2007 . Retrieved 2008-02-12 . &#160; 
 ^  nl:Nederduits 
 ^  some of which might be reborrowings from Germanic Frankish 
 ^  a phenomenon known in German as Denglisch or in English as Germish or Denglisch 
 ^  Verein Deutsche Sprache e.V. "Verein Deutsche Sprache e.V. - Der Anglizismen-Index" . Vds-ev.de . Retrieved 2010-03-15 . &#160; 
 ^  "Ein Hinweis in eigener Sache" . Wortschatz.informatik.uni-leipzig.de. 2003-01-07 . Retrieved 2010-03-15 . &#160; 
 ^  Adolf Reinecke, Die deutsche Buchstabenschrift: ihre Entstehung und Entwicklung, ihre Zweckmäßigkeit und völkische Bedeutung , Leipzig, Hasert, 1910 
 ^  "Mittelschulvorbereitung Deutsch" . Mittelschulvorbereitung.ch . Retrieved 2010-03-15 . &#160; 
 ^  For a history of the German consonants see Fausto Cercignani , The Consonants of German: Synchrony and Diachrony , Milano, Cisalpino, 1979. 
 ^  "Learning German, Experiencing Culture - Goethe-Institut" . Goethe.de . Retrieved 2012-01-24 . &#160; 
 ^  "Who we are" . DW.DE. 2011-12-31 . Retrieved 2013-06-14 . &#160; 
 
 
 Bibliography  
 
 
 Fausto Cercignani , The Consonants of German: Synchrony and Diachrony , Milano, Cisalpino, 1979. 
 Michael Clyne , The German Language in a Changing Europe (1995) ISBN 0-521-49970-4 
 George O. Curme , A Grammar of the German Language (1904, 1922)—the most complete and authoritative work in English 
 Anthony Fox, The Structure of German (2005) ISBN 0-19-927399-5 
 W.B. Lockwood, German Today: The Advanced Learner's Guide (1987) ISBN 0-19-815850-5 
 Ruth H. Sanders. German: Biography of a Language (Oxford University Press; 2010) 240 pages. Combines linguistic, anthropological, and historical perspectives in a "biography" of German in terms of six "signal events" over millennia, including the Battle of Kalkriese, which blocked the spread of Latin-based language north. 
 
 
 External links  
 
 
 Find more about German language at Wikipedia's sister projects 
 
 
  
 Definitions and translations from Wiktionary 
 
 
  
 Media from Commons 
 
 
  
 Quotations from Wikiquote 
 
 
  
 Travel guide from Wikivoyage 
 
 
  
 Learning resources from Wikiversity 
 
 
  
 Database entry Q188 on Wikidata 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: BLL German 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: German 
 
 
 
 
 
 German edition of Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 Texts on Wikisource:
 
 " German language ", Encyclopædia Britannica , 11th ed., 1911 
 Mark Twain , The Awful German Language , 1880 
 Carl Schurz , The German Mothertongue , 1897 
 
 
 German (language) on the Open Directory Project 
 German vocabulary , a German language vocabulary resource. 
 Collins online English-German Dictionary 
 Online English-German Translation 
 German dictionary English - German Online Dictionary 
 The Goethe Institute : German Government sponsored organisation for the promotion of the German language and culture. 
 Foreign Service Institute German basic course, audio, assignments, G+ hangouts and media sources 
 US Foreign Service Institute German courses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 t 
 e 
 
 
 Modern Germanic languages and dialects 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 North Germanic 
 
 
 
 
 West Scandinavian 
 
 
 
 Faroese 
 Icelandic 
 Norwegian ( Nynorsk ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 East Scandinavian 
 
 
 
 Danish 
 Norwegian ( Bokmål ) 
 Swedish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 West Germanic 
 
 
 
 
 Anglo-Frisian 
 
 
 
 English 
 North Frisian 
 Saterland Frisian 
 Scots 
 West Frisian 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Low Franconian 
 
 
 
 Afrikaans 
 Dutch 
 West Flemish 
 Limburgish 
 Zeelandic 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Low German / 
 Dutch Low Saxon 
 
 
 
 Achterhooks 
 Drèents 
 East Frisian Low Saxon 
 Gronings 
 Low German 
 Plautdietsch 
 Sallaans 
 Stellingwarfs 
 Tweants 
 Veluws 
 Westphalian 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 High German 
 
 
 
 
 Central German 
 
 
 
 Colognian 
 German 
 Luxembourgish 
 Palatine German 
 Pennsylvania German 
 Hunsrik 
 Silesian German 
 Upper Saxon 
 Wymysorys 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Upper German 
 
 
 
 Alsatian 
 Bavarian 
 Colonia Tovar 
 Main-Franconian 
 Cimbrian 
 Hutterite German 
 Mòcheno 
 Swabian 
 Swiss German 
 Walser 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yiddish 
 
 
 
 Yiddish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 t 
 e 
 
 
 Germany &#160; topics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 History 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Timeline 
 Military history 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Germanic peoples 
 Migration Period 
 Frankish Empire 
 Holy Roman Empire 
 East Colonisation 
 Confederation of the Rhine 
 German Confederation 
 North German Confederation 
 German Empire 
 World War I 
 Weimar Republic 
 Nazi Germany 
 Divided Germany 
 Allied occupation 
 Expulsions 
 East Germany 
 West Germany 
 Reunification 
 Reunified Germany 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Geography 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Administrative divisions 
 
 States 
 Districts 
 
 
 Cities and towns 
 Islands 
 Lakes 
 Mountains 
 Rivers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Politics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bundestag (parliament) 
 Bundeswehr (military) 
 Cabinet 
 Chancellor 
 Constitution 
 Court system 
 Elections 
 Foreign relations 
 Human rights 
 
 LGBT 
 
 
 Law 
 Law enforcement 
 Political parties 
 President 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Economy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Agriculture 
 Automobile industry 
 Banking 
 
 Central bank 
 
 
 Chemical Triangle 
 Economic history 
 Energy 
 German model 
 German states by GDP 
 Mining 
 Mittelstand companies 
 Science and technology 
 Stock exchange 
 Taxation 
 Telecommunications 
 Tourism 
 Trade unions 
 Transport 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Society 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crime 
 Demographics 
 Education 
 Germans 
 
 Ethnic groups 
 
 
 Healthcare 
 Immigration 
 Pensions 
 Religion 
 Social issues 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Culture 
 
 
 
 Anthem 
 Architecture 
 Arts 
 Cinema 
 Coat of arms 
 Cuisine 
 Dance 
 Fashion 
 Festivals 
 Flag 
 Language 
 Literature 
 Internet 
 Media 
 Music 
 Names 
 Philosophy 
 Prussian virtues 
 Sport 
 Television 
 World Heritage 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Outline 
 Index 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Book 
 Category 
 Portal 
 WikiProject 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ↓ A request for comment about this template ( Template:Europe topic ) is currently held. ↓ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 t 
 e 
 
 
 Languages of Europe 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sovereign states 
 
 
 
 Albania 
 Andorra 
 Armenia 
 Austria 
 Azerbaijan 
 Belarus 
 Belgium 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Bulgaria 
 Croatia 
 Cyprus 
 Czech Republic 
 Denmark 
 Estonia 
 Finland 
 France 
 Georgia 
 Germany 
 Greece 
 Hungary 
 Iceland 
 Ireland 
 Italy 
 Kazakhstan 
 Latvia 
 Liechtenstein 
 Lithuania 
 Luxembourg 
 Macedonia 
 Malta 
 Moldova 
 Monaco 
 Montenegro 
 Netherlands 
 Norway 
 Poland 
 Portugal 
 Romania 
 Russia 
 San Marino 
 Serbia 
 Slovakia 
 Slovenia 
 Spain 
 Sweden 
 Switzerland 
 Turkey 
 Ukraine 
 United Kingdom 
 
 England 
 Northern Ireland 
 Scotland 
 Wales 
 
 
 Vatican City 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 States with limited 
recognition 
 
 
 
 
 Abkhazia 
 Kosovo 
 Nagorno-Karabakh 
 Northern Cyprus 
 South Ossetia 
 Transnistria 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dependencies and 
other territories 
 
 
 
 
 Åland 
 Faroe Islands 
 Gibraltar 
 Guernsey 
 Jersey 
 Isle of Man 
 Svalbard 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Other entities 
 
 
 
 European Union 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   



 								 
				Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=German_language&amp;oldid=599007151 "				 
												 Categories : Languages with ISO 639-2 code Languages with ISO 639-1 code Fusional languages German language High German languages Languages of Austria Languages of Belgium Languages of Brazil Languages of Denmark Languages of France Languages of Germany Languages of Hungary Languages of Kazakhstan Languages of Liechtenstein Languages of Luxembourg Languages of Namibia Languages of Romania Languages of Russia Languages of Switzerland Languages of Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol Stress-timed languages Subject–object–verb languages Subject–verb–object languages Verb-second languages  Hidden categories: Articles with Swedish-language external links Use dmy dates from June 2011 Articles containing German-language text Articles needing additional references from November 2013 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2011 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2010 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2009 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2011 Articles with hAudio microformats Articles with Open Directory Project links  												 
							 
		 
		 
			 Navigation menu 
			 
				 
	 Personal tools 
	 
 Create account Log in 	 
 
				 
					 
	 Namespaces 
	 
					 Article 
					 Talk 
			 
 
 
	 
		 
	 Variants 
	 
		 
					 
	 
 
				 
				 
					 
	 Views 
	 
					 Read 
					 Edit 
					 View history 
			 
 
 
	 Actions 
	 
		 
					 
	 
 
 
	 Search 
	 
					 
					 		 
	 
 
				 
			 
			 
					 
				 
	 Navigation 
	 
		 
			 Main page 
			 Contents 
			 Featured content 
			 Current events 
			 Random article 
			 Donate to Wikipedia 
			 Wikimedia Shop 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Interaction 
	 
		 
			 Help 
			 About Wikipedia 
			 Community portal 
			 Recent changes 
			 Contact page 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Tools 
	 
		 
			 What links here 
			 Related changes 
			 Upload file 
			 Special pages 
			 Permanent link 
			 Page information 
			 Data item 
 Cite this page 		 
	 
 
 
	 Print/export 
	 
		 
			 Create a book 
			 Download as PDF 
			 Printable version 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Languages 
	 
		 
			 Acèh 
			 Адыгэбзэ 
			 Afrikaans 
			 Alemannisch 
			 አማርኛ 
			 Ænglisc 
			 Аҧсшәа 
			 العربية 
			 Aragonés 
			 ܐܪܡܝܐ 
			 Arpetan 
			 Asturianu 
			 Avañe'ẽ 
			 Aymar aru 
			 Azərbaycanca 
			 বাংলা 
			 Bân-lâm-gú 
			 Basa Banyumasan 
			 Башҡортса 
			 Беларуская 
			 Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ 
			 Bikol Central 
			 Български 
			 Boarisch 
			 བོད་ཡིག 
			 Bosanski 
			 Brezhoneg 
			 Буряад 
			 Català 
			 Чӑвашла 
			 Cebuano 
			 Čeština 
			 Corsu 
			 Cymraeg 
			 Dansk 
			 Deitsch 
			 Deutsch 
			 ދިވެހިބަސް 
			 Diné bizaad 
			 Dolnoserbski 
			 Eesti 
			 Ελληνικά 
			 Emiliàn e rumagnòl 
			 Эрзянь 
			 Español 
			 Esperanto 
			 Estremeñu 
			 Euskara 
			 فارسی 
			 Fiji Hindi 
			 Føroyskt 
			 Français 
			 Frysk 
			 Fulfulde 
			 Furlan 
			 Gaeilge 
			 Gaelg 
			 Gàidhlig 
			 Galego 
			 贛語 
			 ગુજરાતી 
			 𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺 
			 客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî 
			 Хальмг 
			 한국어 
			 Հայերեն 
			 हिन्दी 
			 Hornjoserbsce 
			 Hrvatski 
			 Ido 
			 Ilokano 
			 বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী 
			 Bahasa Indonesia 
			 Interlingua 
			 Interlingue 
			 Ирон 
			 IsiXhosa 
			 IsiZulu 
			 Íslenska 
			 Italiano 
			 עברית 
			 Basa Jawa 
			 Kalaallisut 
			 ಕನ್ನಡ 
			 Къарачай-малкъар 
			 ქართული 
			 Kaszëbsczi 
			 Қазақша 
			 Kernowek 
			 Kinyarwanda 
			 Kiswahili 
			 Коми 
			 Kongo 
			 Kreyòl ayisyen 
			 Kurdî 
			 Кыргызча 
			 Ladino 
			 Лезги 
			 Latgaļu 
			 Latina 
			 Latviešu 
			 Lëtzebuergesch 
			 Lietuvių 
			 Ligure 
			 Limburgs 
			 Lingála 
			 Lojban 
			 Lumbaart 
			 Magyar 
			 Македонски 
			 Malagasy 
			 മലയാളം 
			 Māori 
			 मराठी 
			 მარგალური 
			 مصرى 
			 مازِرونی 
			 Bahasa Melayu 
			 Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ 
			 Mirandés 
			 Мокшень 
			 Монгол 
			 Nāhuatl 
			 Nederlands 
			 Nedersaksies 
			 नेपाल भाषा 
			 日本語 
			 Napulitano 
			 Нохчийн 
			 Nordfriisk 
			 Norfuk / Pitkern 
			 Norsk bokmål 
			 Norsk nynorsk 
			 Nouormand 
			 Novial 
			 Occitan 
			 Олык марий 
			 Oʻzbekcha 
			 ਪੰਜਾਬੀ 
			 Pälzisch 
			 Pangasinan 
			 پنجابی 
			 Papiamentu 
			 پښتو 
			 Перем Коми 
			 ភាសាខ្មែរ 
			 Picard 
			 Piemontèis 
			 Tok Pisin 
			 Plattdüütsch 
			 Polski 
			 Português 
			 Qırımtatarca 
			 Reo Mā`ohi 
			 Ripoarisch 
			 Română 
			 Romani 
			 Rumantsch 
			 Runa Simi 
			 Русиньскый 
			 Русский 
			 Саха тыла 
			 Sámegiella 
			 Gagana Samoa 
			 संस्कृतम् 
			 Sardu 
			 Scots 
			 Seeltersk 
			 Sesotho 
			 Shqip 
			 Sicilianu 
			 Simple English 
			 SiSwati 
			 Slovenčina 
			 Slovenščina 
			 Словѣньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟ 
			 Ślůnski 
			 Soomaaliga 
			 کوردی 
			 Српски / srpski 
			 Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски 
			 Basa Sunda 
			 Suomi 
			 Svenska 
			 Tagalog 
			 தமிழ் 
			 Tarandíne 
			 Татарча/tatarça 
			 తెలుగు 
			 Tetun 
			 ไทย 
			 Тоҷикӣ 
			 ᏣᎳᎩ 
			 Türkçe 
			 Türkmençe 
			 Удмурт 
			 Українська 
			 اردو 
			 ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche 
			 Vahcuengh 
			 Vèneto 
			 Vepsän kel’ 
			 Tiếng Việt 
			 Volapük 
			 Võro 
			 Walon 
			 文言 
			 West-Vlams 
			 Winaray 
			 吴语 
			 ייִדיש 
			 Yorùbá 
			 粵語 
			 Zazaki 
			 Zeêuws 
			 Žemaitėška 
			 中文 
			 
			 Edit links 
		 
	 
 
			 
		 
		 
							 
											 This page was last modified on 10 March 2014 at 17:00. 
											 Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. 
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
									 
							 
											 Privacy policy 
											 About Wikipedia 
											 Disclaimers 
											 Contact Wikipedia 
											 Developers 
											 Mobile view