Hindi - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 





 
 
		 
		 
		 
			 
			 
						 
						 Hindi 
			 
								 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
								   (Redirected from Hindi language ) 
												 
					Jump to:					 navigation , 					 search 
				 
				 This article is about Modern Standard Hindi. For other uses, see Hindi (disambiguation) . 
 
 
 
 
 
 This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in the Hindi Wikipedia . (December 2013) 
 
 Click  on the right to read important instructions before translating. 
 
 
 View a machine-translated version of the Hindi article. 
 Google's machine translation is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia. 
 Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article. 
 After translating, {{Translated|hi|हिन्दी}} must be added to the talk page to ensure copyright compliance . 
 For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 This article includes a list of references , but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations . Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (February 2014) 
 
 
 
 
 Hindi 
 
 
 हिन्दी or मानक हिन्दी 
 Hindī or Mānak Hindī 
 
 
  
 The word "Hindi" in Devanagari script 
 
 
 
 Pronunciation 
 Hindustani pronunciation:&#160;  
 
 
 Native&#160;to 
 India 
Significant communities in South Africa, Nepal 
 
 
 
 Native speakers 
 
 180 million &#160;(1991)  
 
 
 
 Language family 
 
 
 Indo-European 
 
 Indo-Iranian 
 
 Indo-Aryan 
 
 Central Zone 
 
 Western Hindi 
 
 Hindustani  
 
 Khariboli  
 
 Hindi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Writing system 
 
 Devanagari ( Brahmic ) 
 Hindi Braille 
 
 
 
 Signed form(s) 
 
 Signed Hindi 
 
 
 Official status 
 
 
 
 Official language&#160;in 
 
 &#160; India 
 
 
 Regulated&#160;by 
 Central Hindi Directorate (India)  
 
 
 Language codes 
 
 
 ISO 639-1 
 hi 
 
 
 ISO 639-2 
 hin 
 
 
 ISO 639-3 
 hin 
 
 
 
 Linguist list 
 
 hin-hin 
 
 
 Linguasphere 
 59-AAF-qf 
 
 
 
 Areas (red) where Hindustani ( Khariboli /Kauravi) is the native language, compared to all Indic languages (dark grey) 
 
 
 
 Hindi ( हिन्दी ), or more precisely Modern Standard Hindi (मानक हिन्दी), is a standardised and Sanskritised register of the Hindustani language . Hindustani is the native language of people living in Delhi , Haryana , Uttar Pradesh , Bihar , Jharkhand , Madhya Pradesh and parts of Rajasthan .  Hindi is one of the official languages of India . 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 
 
 1 Related languages and dialects 
 2 Official status 
 3 History 
 4 Comparison with Modern Standard Urdu 
 5 Script 
 6 Sanskrit vocabulary 
 7 Literature 
 8 Internet 
 9 Sample text 
 10 See also 
 11 References 
 
 11.1 Notes 
 11.2 Bibliography 
 11.3 Dictionaries 
 
 
 12 Further reading 
 13 External links 
 
 
 
 Related languages and dialects  
 Standard Hindi is mutually intelligible with the other standardized register of Hindustani, Urdu , which is associated with the North Indian Muslim community.  The two standards are nearly identical in structure and grammar. Mutual intelligibility decreases in literary and specialised contexts, which rely on educated vocabulary drawn from different sources; Hindi drawing its specialised vocabulary from Sanskrit , whilst Urdu does so from Persian and Arabic . In their colloquial forms, the two varieties are nearly indistinguishable. 
 People who identify as native speakers of "Hindi" include not only Hindu speakers of Hindustani, but also many speakers of related languages who consider their speech to be a dialect of Hindi. In the 2001 Indian census, 258 million (258,000,000) people in India reported Hindi to be their native language;  in the world. 
 Official status  
 The Indian constitution, adopted in 1950, declares Hindi shall be written in the Devanagari script and will be the official language of the Federal Government of India.  The Constitution of India has effectively instituted the usage of Hindi and English as the two languages of communication for the Union Government . Most government documentation is prepared in three languages: English, Hindi, and the primary official language of the local state, if it is not Hindi or English. 
 Article 351 of the Indian constitution stipulates that Hindi language shall be enriched by drawing for its vocabulary primarily from Sanskrit and secondarily from other languages.  The trend is different in Hindi cinema where more and more English, Persian , Turkish and Arabic vocabulary is preferred. Article 344 stipulates that official language commission shall be constituted every ten years to recommend steps for progressive use of Hindi language and imposing restrictions on the use of the English language. In practice, the official language commissions are constantly endeavoring to promote Hindi but not imposing restrictions on English in official use. 
 It was envisioned that Hindi would become the sole working language of the Union Government by 1965 (per directives in Article 344 (2) and Article 351),  
 At the state level, Hindi is the official language of the following states: Bihar , Chhattisgarh , Delhi , Haryana , Himachal Pradesh , Jharkhand , Madhya Pradesh , Rajasthan , Uttar Pradesh , and Uttarakhand . Each may also designate a "co-official language"; in Uttar Pradesh, for instance, depending on the political formation in power, this language is generally Urdu. Similarly, Hindi is accorded the status of co-official language in several additional states.  
 National-language status for Hindi is a long-debated theme. An Indian court clarified that Hindi is not the national language of India because the constitution does not mention it as such.  
 History  
 Further information: History of Hindustani 
 The dialect upon which Standard Hindi is based is Khariboli , the vernacular of Delhi and the surrounding western Uttar Pradesh and southern Uttarakhand region. This dialect acquired linguistic prestige in the Mughal Empire (17th century) and became known as Urdu , "the language of the court". In the late 19th century, the movement standardizing a written language from Khariboli, for the Indian masses in North India, started to standardize Hindi as a separate language from Urdu, which was learnt by the elite. In 1881 Bihar accepted Hindi as its sole official language, replacing Urdu, and thus became the first state of India to adopt Hindi. 
 After independence, the government of India instituted the following conventions:  
 
 standardisation of grammar: In 1954, the Government of India set up a committee to prepare a grammar of Hindi; The committee's report was released in 1958 as "A Basic Grammar of Modern Hindi" 
 standardisation of the orthography, using the Devanagari script, by the Central Hindi Directorate of the Ministry of Education and Culture to bring about uniformity in writing, to improve the shape of some Devanagari characters, and introducing diacritics to express sounds from other languages. 
 
 The Constituent Assembly adopted Hindi as the Official Language of the Union on 14 September 1949. Hence, it is celebrated as Hindi Day. 
 Comparison with Modern Standard Urdu  
 See also: Hindi–Urdu controversy , Hindustani phonology ,&#160;and Hindustani grammar 
 Linguistically, Hindi and Urdu are the same language. Hindi is written in the Devanagari script and uses more Sanskrit words, whereas Urdu is written in the Persian script and uses more Persian words. 
 Script  
 See also: Devanagari script 
 Hindi is mainly written in Devanagari script ( देवनागरी लिपि ' devanāgarī lipi' ) also called Nagari . Devanagari consists of 11 vowels and 33 consonants , and is written from left to right. 
 Sanskrit vocabulary  
 Further information: Hindustani etymology &#160;and&#160; List of Sanskrit and Persian roots in Hindi 
 Formal Standard Hindi draws much of its academic vocabulary from Sanskrit. Standard Hindi loans words are divided into five principal categories: 
 
 Tatsam (तत्सम / same as that ) words: These are words which are spelt the same in Hindi as in Sanskrit (except for the absence of final case inflexions).  Pronunciation, however, conforms to Hindi norms and may differ from that of classical Sanskrit. Amongst nouns, the tatsam word could be the Sanskrit uninflected word-stem, or it could be the nominative singular form in the Sanskrit nominal declension. 
 Ardhatatsam (अर्धतत्सम) words: Such words have typically undergone sound changes subsequent to being borrowed. 
 Tadbhav (तद्भव / born of that ) words: These are words that are spelt differently from in Sanskrit but are derivable from a Sanskrit prototype by phonological rules (e.g. Sanskrit karma , "deed" becomes Pali kamma , and eventually Hindi kām , "work").  
 Deshaj (देशज) words: These are words that were not borrowings but do not derive from attested Indo-Aryan words either. Belonging to this category are onomatopoetic words. 
 Videshī (विदेशी/ 'Foreign') words: these include all words borrowed from sources other than Indo-Aryan. The most frequent sources of borrowing in this category have been Persian, Arabic, Portuguese and English. 
 
 The Hindi standard, from which much of the Persian, Arabic and English vocabulary has been purged and replaced by tatsam words, is called Shuddha Hindi (pure Hindi), and is viewed as a more prestigious dialect over other more colloquial forms of Hindi. 
 Similarly, Urdu treats its own vocabulary, borrowed directly from Persian and Arabic, as a separate category for morphological purposes. Excessive use of tatsam words creates problems for native speakers. They may have Sanskrit consonant clusters which do not exist in native Hindi. The educated middle class of India may be able to pronounce such words, but others have difficulty. Persian and Arabic vocabulary given 'authentic' pronunciations cause similar difficulty. 
 Literature  
 
 
 
  
A Tram in Melbourne with a caution message in Hindi 
 
 
 Main article: Hindi literature 
 Hindi literature is broadly divided into four prominent forms or styles, being Bhakti (devotional – Kabir , Raskhan ); Shringar (beauty – Keshav , Bihari ); Virgatha (extolling brave warriors); and Adhunik (modern). 
 Medieval Hindi literature is marked by the influence of Bhakti movement and the composition of long, epic poems. It was primarily written in other varieties of Hindi , particularly Avadhi and Braj Bhasha , but also in Khariboli . During the British Raj , Hindustani became the prestige dialect. Hindustani with heavily Sanskritised vocabulary or Sahityik Hindi (Literary Hindi) was popularised by the writings of Swami Dayananda Saraswati , Bhartendu Harishchandra and others. The rising numbers of newspapers and magazines made Hindustani popular with the educated people. Chandrakanta , written by Devaki Nandan Khatri , is considered the first authentic work of prose in modern Hindi. The person who brought realism in the Hindi prose literature was Munshi Premchand , who is considered as the most revered figure in the world of Hindi fiction and progressive movement. 
 The Dwivedi Yug ("Age of Dwivedi") in Hindi literature lasted from 1900 to 1918. It is named after Mahavir Prasad Dwivedi , who played a major role in establishing the Modern Hindi language in poetry and broadening the acceptable subjects of Hindi poetry from the traditional ones of religion and romantic love. 
 In the 20th century, Hindi literature saw a romantic upsurge. This is known as Chhayavaad ( shadowism ) and the literary figures belonging to this school are known as Chhayavaadi . Jaishankar Prasad , Suryakant Tripathi 'Nirala' , Mahadevi Varma and Sumitranandan Pant , are the four major Chhayavaadi poets. 
 Uttar Adhunik is the post-modernist period of Hindi literature, marked by a questioning of early trends that copied the West as well as the excessive ornamentation of the Chhayavaadi movement, and by a return to simple language and natural themes. 
 Internet  
 See also: Indic computing 
 Hindi has a presence on the internet,  with words such as avatar (meaning a spirit taking a new form) used in computer sciences, artificial intelligence and even robotics. 
 Sample text  
 See also: Urdu#Examples 
 The following is a sample text in High Hindi, of the Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (by the United Nations): 
 
 Hindi 
 अनुच्छेद 1 — सभी मनुष्यों को गौरव और अधिकारों के मामले में जन्मजात स्वतन्त्रता और समानता प्राप्त हैं। उन्हें बुद्धि और अन्तरात्मा की देन प्राप्त है और परस्पर उन्हें भाईचारे के भाव से बर्ताव करना चाहिए। 
 
 
 Transliteration ( IAST ) 
 Anucched 1 — Sabhī manuṣyõ ko gaurav aur adhikārõ ke māmle mẽ janmajāt svatantratā aur samāntā prāpt hai. Unhẽ buddhi aur antarātmā kī den prāpt hai aur paraspar unhẽ bhāīcāre ke bhāv se bartāv karnā cāhie . 
 
 
 Transcription ( IPA ) 
 ənʊtʃʰːeːd̪ eːk — səbʱiː mənʊʃjõː koː ɡɔːɾəʋ ɔːr əd̪ʱɪkaːɾõ keː maːmleː mẽː dʒənmədʒaːt̪ sʋət̪ənt̪ɾət̪aː pɾaːpt̪ hɛː. ʊnʱẽ bʊd̪ʱːɪ ɔːɾ ənt̪əɾaːt̪maː kiː d̪eːn pɾaːpt̪ hɛː ɔːɾ pəɾəspəɾ ʊnʱẽː bʱaːiːtʃaːɾeː keː bʱaːʋ seː bəɾt̪aːʋ kəɾnə tʃaːhɪeː . 
 
 
 Gloss (word-to-word) 
 Article 1 — All human-beings to dignity and rights' matter in from-birth freedom and equality acquired is. Them to reason and conscience's endowment acquired is and always them to brotherhood's spirit with behavior to do should. 
 
 
 Translation (grammatical) 
 Article 1 — All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood. 
 
 See also  
 
 
 
 
 
 Book: Hindi 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hindustani (covers phonology, grammar, and orthography) 
 Anti-Hindi agitations of Tamil Nadu 
 List of Sanskrit and Persian roots in Hindi 
 Languages of India and Languages with official status in India 
 List of languages by number of native speakers in India 
 The list of Hindi words at Wiktionary , the free dictionary 
 List of English words of Hindi or Urdu origin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  India portal 
  Languages portal 
  Hindi portal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 References  
 Notes  
 
 
 ^  Hindi reference at Ethnologue (16th ed., 2009) 
 ^  a   b  Hindustani (2005). Keith Brown , ed. Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics (2 ed.). Elsevier. ISBN 0-08-044299-4 . &#160; 
 ^  The Central Hindi Directorate regulates the use of Devanagari script and Hindi spelling in India. Source: Central Hindi Directorate: Introduction 
 ^  Hindi (2005). Keith Brown , ed. Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics (2 ed.). Elsevier. ISBN 0-08-044299-4 . &#160; 
 ^  "Data by speakers of language" . Census of India. 2001 . Retrieved 18 February 2013 . &#160; 
 ^  http://www.ethnologue.com/language/hin 
 ^  http://www.ethnologue.com/language/hin 
 ^  "Sequence of events with reference to official language of the Union" . &#160; 
 ^  "The Constitution of India" (PDF) . Retrieved 18 February 2013 . &#160; 
 ^  "Constitution of India" . Retrieved 21 March 2012 . &#160; 
 ^  "Rajbhasha" (in Hindi &amp; English). india.gov.in. &#160;  
 ^  http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/hindi-not-a-national-language-court/article94695.ece 
 ^  a   b  Masica, p. 65 
 ^  Masica, p. 66 
 ^  Masica, p. 67 
 ^  "Usage of Hindi for websites" . W3Techs.com . Retrieved 9 September 2013 . &#160; 
 ^  Pann Yu Mon, Madhukara Phatak (2012). "Search Engines and Asian Languages" . In Laurent Vannini, Hervé le Crosnier. Net.lang&#160;: towards the multilingual cyberspace . Caen: C&amp;F éd. coord by Maaya Network. p.&#160;174. ISBN &#160; 978-2-915825-09-1 . Retrieved 9 September 2013 . &#160; 
 ^  Eluvangal, Sreejiraj (4 April 2011). "URLs in 7 regional languages soon" . DNA . Retrieved 9 September 2013 . &#160; 
 ^  "Silicon Valley gets linguistic enlightenment from India" . Retrieved 28 October 2013 . &#160; 
 
 
 Bibliography  
 
 Bhatia, Tej K. Colloquial Hindi: The Complete Course for Beginners . London , UK &amp; New York , NY: Routledge, 1996. ISBN 0-415-11087-4 (Book), 0415110882 (Cassettes), 0415110890 (Book &amp; Cassette Course) 
 Grierson, G. A. Linguistic Survey of India Vol I-XI, Calcutta, 1928, ISBN 81-85395-27-6 
 McGregor, R. S. (1977), Outline of Hindi Grammar , 2nd Ed., Oxford University Press, Oxford-Delhi, ISBN 0-19-870008-3 (3rd ed.) 
 Masica, Colin (1991), The Indo-Aryan Languages , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN &#160; 978-0-521-29944-2 &#160; . 
 Ohala, Manjari (1999), "Hindi" , in International Phonetic Association , Handbook of the International Phonetic Association: a Guide to the Use of the International Phonetic Alphabet , Cambridge University Press, pp.&#160;100–103, ISBN &#160; 978-0-521-63751-0 &#160; . 
 Sadana, Rashmi (2012), English Heart, Hindi Heartland: the Political Life of Literature in India , University of California Press, ISBN &#160; 9780520269576 &#160; . 
 Shapiro, Michael C. (2001), "Hindi", in Garry, Jane; Rubino, Carl, An encyclopedia of the world's major languages, past and present , New England Publishing Associates, pp.&#160;305–309 &#160; . 
 Shapiro, Michael C. (2003), "Hindi" , in Cardona, George; Jain, Dhanesh, The Indo-Aryan Languages , Routledge, pp.&#160;250–285, ISBN &#160; 978-0-415-77294-5 &#160; . 
 Snell, Rupert; Weightman, Simon (1989), Teach Yourself Hindi (2003 ed.), McGraw-Hill, ISBN &#160; 978-0-07-142012-9 &#160; . 
 Taj, Afroz (2002) A door into Hindi  . Retrieved 8 November 2005. 
 Tiwari, Bholanath ( 2004) हिन्दी भाषा (Hindī Bhasha) , Kitab Pustika, Allahabad, ISBN 81-225-0017-X . 
 
 Dictionaries  
 
 John Thompson Platts (1884), A dictionary of Urdū, classical Hindī, and English (reprint ed.), LONDON: H. Milford, p.&#160;1259 , retrieved 2011-07-06 &#160; Oxford University 
 Academic Room Hindi Dictionary Mobile App developed in the Harvard Innovation Lab (iOS, Android and Blackberry) 
 McGregor, R.S. (1993), Oxford Hindi–English Dictionary (2004 ed.), Oxford University Press, USA &#160; . 
 
 Further reading  
 
 Bhatia, Tej K A History of the Hindi Grammatical Tradition . Leiden, Netherlands &amp; New York, NY: E.J. Brill, 1987. ISBN 90-04-07924-6 
 Sadana, Rashmi, " Managing Hindi ," The Caravan. April 2012. 
 
 External links  
 
 
 
 Hindi edition of Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 Hindi on the Open Directory Project 
 The Union: Official Language 
 Hindi language font and resources 
 Official Unicode Chart for Devanagari (PDF) 
 USA Foreign Service Institute (FSI) Hindi basic course 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 t 
 e 
 
 
 Hindi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grammar 
 Phonology 
 Devanagari 
 Braille 
 History 
 Vocabulary 
 Hindustani 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Western 
 
 
 
 Braj Bhasha 
 Hariyanvi 
 Bundeli 
 Kannauji 
 Sansiboli 
 Khari boli ( Registers : Urdu 
 Standard Hindi ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eastern 
 
 
 
 Awadhi 
 Bhojpuri 
 Bagheli 
 Fiji Hindi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pidgins and Creoles 
 
 
 
 Hinglish 
 Bombay Hindi 
 Haflong Hindi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Other 
 
 
 
 Dakhni 
 Parya 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Language politics 
 
 
 
 Anti-Hindi agitations of Tamil Nadu 
 Hindi-Urdu controversy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Arts 
 
 
 
 Literature 
 Awards 
 Sahitya Akademi Award 
 Jnanpith Award 
 Bollywood 
 Writers 
 Poets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 t 
 e 
 
 
  Official languages of India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Union-level 
 
 
 
 Hindi 
 English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8th schedule to the Indian Constitution 
 
 
 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bodo 
 Dogri 
 Gujarati 
 Hindi 
 Kannada 
 Kashmiri 
 Konkani 
 Maithili 
 Malayalam 
 Manipuri 
 Marathi 
 Nepali 
 Oriya 
 Punjabi 
 Sanskrit 
 Sindhi 
 Santali 
 Tamil 
 Telugu 
 Urdu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 State-level 
 
 
 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bodo 
 Chhattisgarhi 
 Dogri 
 English 
 Garo 
 Gujarati 
 Hindi 
 Kannada 
 Kashmiri 
 Khasi 
 Kokborok 
 Konkani 
 Maithili 
 Malayalam 
 Manipuri 
 Marathi 
 Mizo 
 Nepali 
 Oriya 
 Punjabi 
 Rajasthani 
 Sanskrit 
 Santali 
 Sindhi 
 Telugu 
 Tamil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Other Languages 
 
 
 
 Ahirani 
 Bhojpuri 
 Gondi 
 Haryanvi 
 Magadh/Magahi 
 Madiya 
 Marwari 
 Malvi 
 Mewari 
 Khorth/Khotta 
 Bundeli/Bundelkhan 
 Bagheli/Baghel Khan 
 Pahari 
 Laman/Lambadi 
 Awadhi 
 Harauti 
 Garhwali 
 Nimadi 
 Sadan/Sadri 
 Kumauni 
 Dhundhari 
 Surgujia 
 Bagri Rajasthani 
 Banjari 
 Nagpuria (Varhadi) 
 Surjapuri 
 Kangri 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 t 
 e 
 
 
 &#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; &#160; Indo-Iranian languages &#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; &#160; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 &#160; 
 Indo-Aryan (Indic) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 &#160; 
 Old / Middle 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Old 
 
 
 
 Sanskrit 
 
 Vedic 
 Classical 
 Buddhist 
 
 
 Mitanni superstrate 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Middle 
 
 
 
 Abahatta 
 Apabhraṃśa 
 Dramatic Prakrits 
 
 Magadhi 
 Maharashtri 
 Shauraseni 
 
 
 Elu 
 Gāndhārī 
 Jain 
 Paisaci 
 Pāli 
 Prakrit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 &#160; 
 Modern 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Central 
 
 
 
 
 Hindi 
 
 
 
 Awadhi 
 Bagheli 
 Bambaiya Hindi 
 Brij Bhasha 
 Bhojpuri 
 Sarnami Hindustani 
 Bundeli 
 Chhattisgarhi 
 Fiji Hindi 
 Haryanvi 
 Kannauji 
 Sansiboli 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Urdu 
 
 
 
 Dakhni 
 Rekhta (early form) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Others 
 
 
 
 Dhanwar Rai 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eastern 
 
 
 
 
 Bengali–Assamese 
 
 
 
 Assamese 
 Bengali 
 Bishnupriya Manipuri 
 Chakma 
 Chittagonian 
 Hajong 
 Kayort 
 Kharia Thar 
 Nahari 
 Rajbanshi 
 Rohingya 
 Sylheti 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bihari 
 
 
 
 Angika 
 Magahi 
 Maithili 
 Majhi 
 Sadri 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 other 
 
 
 
 Mal Paharia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Northern 
 
 
 
 Garhwali 
 Kumaoni 
 Nepali 
 
 Palpa 
 
 
 Potwari 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 North 
western 
 
 
 
 
 Punjabi 
 
 
 
 Saraiki 
 Majhi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Others 
 
 
 
 Aer 
 Derawali 
 Dogri 
 Hindko 
 Kangri 
 Kutchi 
 Sindhi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Southern 
 
 
 
 
 Marathi–Konkani 
 
 
 
 Konkani 
 Marathi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Insular 
 
 
 
 Mahal 
 Sinhala 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Western 
 
 
 
 
 Bhil 
 
 
 
 Bhili 
 Gamit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rajasthani 
 
 
 
 Bagri 
 Goaria 
 Gojri 
 Jaipuri 
 Malvi 
 Marwari 
 Mewari 
 Dhatki (sociolect) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Others 
 
 
 
 Domari 
 Gujarati 
 Kalto 
 Khandeshi 
 Parkari Koli 
 Romani 
 Saurashtra 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 &#160; 
 Iranian 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 &#160; 
 Old / Middle 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Old 
 
 
 
 
 Western 
 
 
 
 Old Persian 
 Median 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eastern 
 
 
 
 Avestan 
 Old Scythian 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Middle 
 
 
 
 
 Western 
 
 
 
 Middle Persian 
 Parthian 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eastern 
 
 
 
 Bactrian 
 Khwarezmian 
 Ossetic 
 
 Jassic 
 
 
 Sakan (Sacian) 
 Scythian 
 Sogdian 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 &#160; 
 Modern 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 North 
 
 
 
 Old Azari 
 Balochi 
 Central Iran 
 Zoroastrian Dari 
 Fars 
 Gilaki 
 Gorani 
 Kurdish 
 
 Kurmanji 
 Soranî 
 Kermanshahi 
 Laki 
 
 
 Mazandarani 
 Semnani 
 Taleshi 
 Tati 
 Zazaki 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eastern 
 
 
 
 
 Pamir 
 
 
 
 Ishkashimi 
 Munji 
 Roshani 
 Shughni 
 Sarikoli 
 Wakhi 
 Yazgulami 
 Yidgha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Others 
 
 
 
 Ossetic 
 Pashto 
 Yaghnobi 
 Ormuri 
 Parachi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Western 
 
 
 
 
 South 
 
 
 
 Persian 
 
 Dari 
 Tajik 
 
 
 Luri 
 
 Feyli 
 Bakhtiari 
 Laki 
 Kumzari 
 
 
 Caucasian Tat 
 Larestani 
 Bashkardi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 &#160; 
 Other Indo-Iranian languages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dardic 
 
 
 
 Dameli 
 Domaaki 
 Gawar-Bati 
 Kalami 
 Kalash 
 Kashmiri 
 Khowar 
 Kohistani 
 Nangalami 
 Palula 
 Pashayi 
 Shina 
 Shumashti 
 Torwali 
 Ushoji 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nuristani 
 
 
 
 
 Kamkata-viri 
 
 
 
 Kamviri 
 Kata-vari 
 Mumviri 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Others 
 
 
 
 Askunu 
 Kalasha-ala 
 Kamkata-viri 
 Tregami language 
 Vasi-vari 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Italics indicate extinct languages . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Find out more on Wikipedia's 
 Sister projects 
 
 
 
 
 Media 
from Commons 
 
 
 
 
 
 Travel guides 
from Wikivoyage 
 
 
 
 
 
 News stories 
from Wikinews 
 
 
 
 
 
 Definitions 
from Wiktionary 
 
 
 
 
 
 Textbooks 
from Wikibooks 
 
 
 
 
 
 Quotations 
from Wikiquote 
 
 
 
 
 
 Source texts 
from Wikisource 
 
 
 
 
 
 Learning resources 
from Wikiversity 
 
 
 
 
 



 								 
				Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hindi&amp;oldid=598829204 "				 
												 Categories : Languages with ISO 639-2 code Languages with ISO 639-1 code Hindi Indo-Aryan languages Language versus dialect Languages of Gibraltar Languages of Trinidad and Tobago Official languages of India Standard languages  Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2014 Use dmy dates from March 2013 Use Indian English from June 2013 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Articles to be expanded from December 2013 All articles to be expanded Articles needing translation from Hindi Wikipedia Articles lacking in-text citations from February 2014 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles containing Hindi-language text Language articles citing Ethnologue 16 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2013 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2012 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from June 2013 All articles that may contain original research Articles that may contain original research from August 2011 Articles with Open Directory Project links  												 
							 
		 
		 
			 Navigation menu 
			 
				 
	 Personal tools 
	 
 Create account Log in 	 
 
				 
					 
	 Namespaces 
	 
					 Article 
					 Talk 
			 
 
 
	 
		 
	 Variants 
	 
		 
					 
	 
 
				 
				 
					 
	 Views 
	 
					 Read 
					 Edit 
					 View history 
			 
 
 
	 Actions 
	 
		 
					 
	 
 
 
	 Search 
	 
					 
					 		 
	 
 
				 
			 
			 
					 
				 
	 Navigation 
	 
		 
			 Main page 
			 Contents 
			 Featured content 
			 Current events 
			 Random article 
			 Donate to Wikipedia 
			 Wikimedia Shop 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Interaction 
	 
		 
			 Help 
			 About Wikipedia 
			 Community portal 
			 Recent changes 
			 Contact page 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Tools 
	 
		 
			 What links here 
			 Related changes 
			 Upload file 
			 Special pages 
			 Permanent link 
			 Page information 
			 Data item 
 Cite this page 		 
	 
 
 
	 Print/export 
	 
		 
			 Create a book 
			 Download as PDF 
			 Printable version 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Languages 
	 
		 
			 Адыгэбзэ 
			 Afrikaans 
			 Alemannisch 
			 العربية 
			 Aragonés 
			 অসমীয়া 
			 Asturianu 
			 Avañe'ẽ 
			 Azərbaycanca 
			 বাংলা 
			 Bahasa Banjar 
			 Bân-lâm-gú 
			 Беларуская 
			 Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ 
			 भोजपुरी 
			 Bikol Central 
			 Bislama 
			 Български 
			 བོད་ཡིག 
			 Bosanski 
			 Brezhoneg 
			 Català 
			 Чӑвашла 
			 Cebuano 
			 Čeština 
			 Chavacano de Zamboanga 
			 Cymraeg 
			 Dansk 
			 Deutsch 
			 ދިވެހިބަސް 
			 Dolnoserbski 
			 Eesti 
			 Ελληνικά 
			 Español 
			 Esperanto 
			 Euskara 
			 فارسی 
			 Fiji Hindi 
			 Français 
			 Frysk 
			 Gaeilge 
			 Gaelg 
			 Gàidhlig 
			 Galego 
			 贛語 
			 ગુજરાતી 
			 客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî 
			 한국어 
			 Հայերեն 
			 हिन्दी 
			 Hornjoserbsce 
			 Hrvatski 
			 Ido 
			 বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী 
			 Bahasa Indonesia 
			 Interlingue 
			 ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ/inuktitut 
			 Íslenska 
			 Italiano 
			 עברית 
			 Basa Jawa 
			 Kalaallisut 
			 ಕನ್ನಡ 
			 ქართული 
			 Қазақша 
			 Kiswahili 
			 Коми 
			 Kongo 
			 Kurdî 
			 Ladino 
			 Latina 
			 Latviešu 
			 Lietuvių 
			 Ligure 
			 Limburgs 
			 Magyar 
			 Македонски 
			 Malagasy 
			 മലയാളം 
			 Māori 
			 मराठी 
			 مصرى 
			 مازِرونی 
			 Bahasa Melayu 
			 Монгол 
			 Nāhuatl 
			 Nederlands 
			 नेपाली 
			 नेपाल भाषा 
			 日本語 
			 Napulitano 
			 Norsk bokmål 
			 Norsk nynorsk 
			 Occitan 
			 ଓଡ଼ିଆ 
			 Oʻzbekcha 
			 ਪੰਜਾਬੀ 
			 پنجابی 
			 پښتو 
			 Piemontèis 
			 Plattdüütsch 
			 Polski 
			 Português 
			 Ripoarisch 
			 Română 
			 Runa Simi 
			 Русиньскый 
			 Русский 
			 Саха тыла 
			 Sámegiella 
			 संस्कृतम् 
			 Scots 
			 Shqip 
			 Simple English 
			 Slovenčina 
			 Slovenščina 
			 کوردی 
			 Српски / srpski 
			 Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски 
			 Suomi 
			 Svenska 
			 Tagalog 
			 தமிழ் 
			 Татарча/tatarça 
			 తెలుగు 
			 ไทย 
			 Тоҷикӣ 
			 Türkçe 
			 Українська 
			 اردو 
			 ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche 
			 Vahcuengh 
			 Tiếng Việt 
			 Winaray 
			 吴语 
			 Yorùbá 
			 粵語 
			 Žemaitėška 
			 中文 
			 
			 Edit links 
		 
	 
 
			 
		 
		 
							 
											 This page was last modified on 9 March 2014 at 12:11. 
											 Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. 
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
									 
							 
											 Privacy policy 
											 About Wikipedia 
											 Disclaimers 
											 Contact Wikipedia 
											 Developers 
											 Mobile view