Ido (language) - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 





 
 
		 
		 
		 
			 
			 
						 
						 Ido (language) 
			 
								 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
								 
												 
					Jump to:					 navigation , 					 search 
				 
				 
 
 Ido 
 
 
  
 
 
 Created&#160;by 
 Delegation for the Adoption of an International Auxiliary Language 
 
 
 Date 
 1907 
 
 
 Setting and usage 
 International auxiliary language 
 
 
 Users 
 100–200 &#160;(2000)  
 
 
 Purpose 
 
 constructed language 
 
 International auxiliary language 
 
 Ido 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sources 
 based on Esperanto 
 
 
 Official status 
 
 
 Regulated&#160;by 
 Uniono por la Linguo Internaciona Ido 
 
 
 Language codes 
 
 
 ISO 639-1 
 io 
 
 
 ISO 639-2 
 ido 
 
 
 ISO 639-3 
 ido 
 
 
 Linguasphere 
 51-AAB-db 
 
 
 This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 Ido 
 
 
 
 
 Language 
 Grammar &#160; · Phonology 
 Union 
 vs. Esperanto &#160; · vs. Interlingua 
 vs. Novial 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 History 
 Beaufront &#160; · Couturat 
 Jespersen 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Related 
 Auxiliary language 
 Constructed language 
 Esperanto &#160; · Esperantido 
 Adjuvilo 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia 
 Wikipedio 
 Wikivortaro 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 t 
 e 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ido  /  ˈ  iː  d  oʊ  / is a language created to be a universal second language for speakers of diverse backgrounds. Ido was specifically designed to be grammatically , orthographically , and lexicographically regular, and above all easy to learn and use. In this sense, Ido is classified as a constructed international auxiliary language . 
 Ido was created in 1907 out of a desire to reform perceived flaws in Esperanto , a language that had been created for the same purpose 20 years earlier. The name of the language traces its origin to the Esperanto word ido , meaning "offspring",  since the language is a "descendant" of Esperanto. After its inception, Ido gained support from some in the Esperanto community, but following the sudden death in 1914 of one of its most influential proponents, Louis Couturat , it declined in popularity. There were two reasons for this: first, the emergence of further schisms arising from competing reform projects; and second, a general lack of awareness of Ido as a candidate for an international language. These obstacles weakened the movement and it was not until the rise of the Internet that it began to regain momentum. 
 Ido uses the same 26 letters as the English alphabet with no diacritics . It draws its vocabulary from French, Italian, Spanish, English, German, and Russian, and is largely intelligible to those who have studied Esperanto. 
 Several works of literature have been translated into Ido, including The Little Prince and the Gospel of Luke . As of the year 2000, there were approximately 100–200 Ido speakers in the world.  
 
 
 
 Contents 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 1.1 Digital era 
 1.2 Changes 
 
 
 2 Phonology 
 3 Orthography 
 4 Grammar 
 
 4.1 Syntax 
 4.2 Pronouns 
 4.3 Table of correlatives 
 
 
 5 Vocabulary 
 6 Sample 
 7 Literature and publications 
 8 International Ido conventions 
 9 See also 
 10 References 
 11 External links 
 
 
 
 History  
 The idea of a universal second language is not new, and constructed languages are not a recent phenomenon. The first known constructed language was Lingua Ignota , created in the 12th century. But the idea did not catch on in large numbers until the language Volapük was created in 1879. Volapük was popular for some time and apparently had a few thousand users, but was later eclipsed by the popularity of Esperanto , which arose in 1887. Several other languages such as Latino sine Flexione and Idiom Neutral had also been put forward. It was during this time that French mathematician Louis Couturat formed the Delegation for the Adoption of an International Auxiliary Language . 
 This delegation made a formal request to the International Association of Academies in Vienna to select and endorse an international language; the request was rejected in May 1907.  
 
 
 
  
The International Ido Congress in Dessau , Germany, in 1922 
 
 
 Esperanto's inventor, L. L. Zamenhof , had suggested in an 1894 proposition for a Reformed Esperanto several changes that Ido adopted: eliminating the accented letters and the accusative case, changing the plural to an Italianesque -i , and replacing the table of correlatives with more Latinate words. However, the Esperanto community rejected Reformed Esperanto,  
 It is estimated that 20% of the Esperanto leaders and 3–4% of the ordinary Esperantists defected to Ido.  
 Couturat, who was the leading proponent of Ido, was killed in an automobile accident in 1914.  
 Digital era  
 The language still has active speakers today, and the Internet has sparked a renewal of interest in the language in recent years. A sample of 24 Idists on the Yahoo! group Idolisto during November 2005 showed that 57% had begun their studies of the language during the past three years, 32% from the mid-1990s to 2002, and 8% had known the language from before.  
 Changes  
 Few changes have been made to Ido since 1922.  
 Camiel de Cock was named secretary of linguistic issues in 1990, succeeding Roger Moureaux.  
 Phonology  
 Ido has seven vowels composing five vowel phonemes . The vowels / e / and / ɛ / are interchangeable depending on speaker preference, as are / o / and / ɔ / . The combinations /au/ and /eu/ become diphthongs in word roots but not when adding affixes.  
 
 Ido vowels 
 
 
 Front 
 Back 
 
 
 Close 
 i 
 u 
 
 
 Mid 
 e , ɛ 
 o , ɔ 
 
 
 Open 
 a 
 
 
 
 Ido consonants 
 
 
 Labial 
 Alveolar 
 Post- 
alveolar 
 Palatal 
 Velar 
 Glottal 
 
 
 Nasal 
 
 m 
 
 n 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stop 
 p 
 b 
 t 
 d 
 
 
 k 
 ɡ 
 
 
 
 Affricate 
 
 t͡s 
 
 t͡ʃ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fricative 
 f 
 v 
 s 
 z 
 ʃ 
 ʒ 
 
 
 h 
 
 
 
 Approximant 
 
 
 l 
 
 
 j 
 
 w 
 
 
 
 Flap 
 
 
 ɾ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
All polysyllable words are stressed on the second-to-last syllable except for verb infinitives , which are stressed on the last syllable – sko lo, ka fe o and ler nas for "school", "coffee" and the present tense of "to learn", but i rar , sa var and drin kar for "to go", "to know" and "to drink". If an i or u precedes another vowel, the pair is considered part of the same syllable when applying the accent rule – thus ra dio, fa mi lio and ma nuo for "radio", "family" and "hand", unless the two vowels are the only ones in the word, in which case the "i" or "u" is stressed: di o, fru a for "day" and "early".  
 Orthography  
 Ido uses the same 26 letters as the English alphabet with three digraphs and no ligatures . Where the table below lists two pronunciations, either is perfectly acceptable.  
 
 
 Letter 
 IPA 
 English 
 
 
 a 
 / a / 
 most similar to a as in "f a ther" 
 
 
 b 
 / b / 
 b as in "sta b le" 
 
 
 c 
 / t͡s / 
 ts as in "ca ts "; also used in the digraph ch 
 
 
 d 
 / d / 
 d as in "a d opt" 
 
 
 e 
 / e / , / ɛ / 
 most similar to e as in " e gg" or e as in "b e t" 
 
 
 f 
 / f / 
 f as in "a f raid" 
 
 
 g 
 / ɡ / 
 hard g as in " g o" 
 
 
 h 
 / h / 
 h as in " h at", "a h oy" 
 
 
 i 
 / i / 
 i as in "mach i ne", ee in "b ee " 
 
 
 j 
 / ʒ / 
 s as in "plea s ure, mea s ure" or g in "mira g e, bei g e" 
 
 
 k 
 / k / 
 k as in "s k in, s k ip" 
 
 
 l 
 / l / 
 most similar to l as in " l amb" 
 
 
 m 
 / m / 
 m as in "ad m it" 
 
 
 n 
 / n / 
 n as in "a n alogy" 
 
 
 o 
 / o / , / ɔ / 
 most similar to o as in " o r" 
 
 
 p 
 / p / 
 p as in "s p in, s p ark" 
 
 
 q 
 / k / 
 same as k ; used only in the digraph qu 
 
 
 r 
 / ɾ / 
 tapped or rolled r 
 
 
 s 
 / s / 
 s as in "ea s t"; also used in the digraph sh 
 
 
 t 
 / t / 
 t as in "s t ake, s t op" 
 
 
 u 
 / u / 
 u as in "d u ma", "d u gong" or oo in "m oo n" 
 
 
 v 
 / v / 
 v as in "a v oid" 
 
 
 w 
 / w / 
 w as in "a w ard" 
 
 
 x 
 /ks/ , /ɡz/ 
 x as in "e x cept" or "e x ist" 
 
 
 y 
 / j / 
 y as in " y es" 
 
 
 z 
 / z / 
 z as in " z ebra" 
 
 
 The digraphs are:  
 
 
 Digraph 
 IPA 
 English 
 
 
 ch 
 / t͡ʃ / 
 ch as in " ch ick" 
 
 
 qu 
 /kw/ 
 qu as in " qu ick" 
 
 
 sh 
 / ʃ / 
 sh as in " sh y" 
 
 
 Grammar  
 Each word in the Ido vocabulary is built from a root word. A word consists of a root and a grammatical ending. Other words can be formed from that word by removing the grammatical ending and adding a new one, or by inserting certain affixes between the root and the grammatical ending. 
 Some of the grammatical endings are defined as follows: 
 
 
 Grammatical form 
 Ido 
 English 
 Esperanto 
 
 
 Singular noun 
 -o (libro) 
 book 
 -o (libro) 
 
 
 Plural noun 
 -i (libri) 
 books 
 -oj (libroj) 
 
 
 Adjective 
 -a (varma) 
 warm 
 -a (varma) 
 
 
 Adverb 
 -e (varme) 
 warmly 
 -e (varme) 
 
 
 Present tense infinitive 
 -ar (irar) 
 to be going 
 to go 
 -anti (iranti) 
 -i (iri) 
 
 
 Past tense infinitive 
 -ir (irir) 
 to have gone 
 -inti (irinti) 
 
 
 Future tense infinitive 
 -or (iror) 
 to be going to go 
 -onti (ironti) 
 
 
 Present 
 -as (iras) 
 go, goes 
 -as (iras) 
 
 
 Past 
 -is (iris) 
 went 
 -is (iris) 
 
 
 Future 
 -os (iros) 
 will go 
 -os (iros) 
 
 
 Imperative 
 -ez (irez) 
 go! 
 -u (iru) 
 
 
 Conditional 
 -us (irus) 
 would go 
 -us (irus) 
 
 
 These are the same as in Esperanto except for -i , -ir , -ar , -or and -ez . Esperanto marks noun plurals by an agglutinative ending -j (so plural nouns end in -oj ), uses -i for verb infinitives (Esperanto infinitives are tenseless), and uses -u for the imperative. Verbs in Ido do not conjugate depending on person, number or gender; the - as , - is , and - os endings suffice whether the subject is I, you, he, she, they, or anything else. 
 Syntax  
 Ido word order is generally the same as English ( subject–verb–object ), so the sentence Me havas la blua libro is the same as the English "I have the blue book", both in meaning and word order. There are a few differences, however: 
 
 Adjectives can precede the noun as in English, or follow the noun as in Spanish. Thus, Me havas la libro blua means the same thing. 
 Ido has the accusative suffix -n . Unlike Esperanto, this suffix is only required when the object of the sentence is not clear, for example, when the subject-verb-object word order is not followed. Thus, La blua libron me havas also means the same thing. 
 
 Ido generally does not impose rules of grammatical agreement between grammatical categories within a sentence. For example, the verb in a sentence is invariable regardless of the number and person of the subject. Nor must the adjectives be pluralized as well the nouns – in Ido the large books would be la granda libri as opposed to the French les grands livres or the Esperanto la grandaj libroj . 
 Negation occurs in Ido by simply affixing ne to the front of a verb: Me ne havas libro means, "I do not have a book". This as well does not vary, and thus the "I do not", "He does not", "They do not" before a verb are simply Me ne , Il ne , and Li ne . In the same way, past tense and future tense negatives are formed by ne in front of the conjugated verb. "I will not go" and "I did not go" become Me ne iros and Me ne iris respectively. 
 Yes/no questions are formed by the particle ka in front of the question. "I have a book" (me havas libro) becomes Ka me havas libro? (do I have a book?). Ka can also be placed in front of a noun without a verb to make a simple question, corresponding to the English "is it?" Ka Mark? can mean, "Are you Mark?", "Is it Mark?", "Do you mean Mark?" depending on the context. 
 Pronouns  
 The pronouns of Ido were revised to make them more acoustically distinct than those of Esperanto, which all end in i . Especially the singular and plural first-person pronouns mi and ni may be difficult to distinguish in a noisy environment, so Ido has me and ni instead. Ido also distinguishes between intimate ( tu ) and formal ( vu ) second-person singular pronouns as well as plural second-person pronouns ( vi ) not marked for intimacy. Furthermore, Ido has a pan-gender third-person pronoun lu (it can mean "he", "she", or "it", depending on the context) in addition to its masculine ( il ), feminine ( el ), and neuter ( ol ) third-person pronouns. 
 
 Pronouns 
 
 
 singular 
 plural 
 indefinite 
 
 
 first 
 second 
 third 
 first 
 second 
 third 
 
 
 familiar 
 formal 
 masculine 
 feminine 
 neuter 
 pan-gender 
 masculine 
 feminine 
 neuter 
 pan-gender 
 
 
 Ido 
 me 
 tu 
 vu 
 il(u) 
 el(u) 
 ol(u) 
 lu 
 ni 
 vi 
 ili 
 eli 
 oli 
 li 
 on(u) 
 
 
 English 
 I 
 you 
 you 
 he 
 she 
 it 
 he/she/it 
 we 
 you 
 
 
 
 they 
 one 
 
 
 Esperanto 
 mi 
 ci¹ 
 vi¹ 
 li 
 ŝi 
 ĝi 
 ĝi² 
 ni 
 vi 
 
 
 
 ili 
 oni 
 
 
 
 ci , while technically the familiar form of the word "you" in Esperanto, is almost never used. Results on Google have shown that while tu is only slightly less common than vu in Ido, ci is used less than half of one percent of the amount vi is in Esperanto. Esperanto's inventor himself did not include the pronoun in the first book on Esperanto and only later reluctantly; later he recommended against using ci on the grounds that different cultures have conflicting traditions regarding the use of the familiar and formal forms of "you", and that a universal language should avoid the problem by simply using the formal form in all situations. Unlike some other languages that use a formal second person pronoun, vi is not capitalized.  
 tiu , though not a personal pronoun, is usually used in this circumstance, because many people have a hard time applying "it" to humans. 
 
 It should be noted that ol , like English it and Esperanto ĝi , is not limited to inanimate objects, but can be used "for entities whose sex is indeterminate: babies, children, humans, youths, elders, people, individuals, horses, , cats, etc." 
 Lu is often mistakenly labeled an epicene pronoun, that is, one that refers to both masculine and feminine beings, but in fact, lu is more properly a "pan-gender" pronoun, as it is also used for referring to inanimate objects. From Kompleta Gramatiko Detaloza di la Linguo Internaciona Ido by Beaufront: 
 
 Lu (like li ) is used for all three genders. That lu does duty for the three genders at will in the singular is not in itself any more astonishing than seeing li serve the three genders at will in the plural ... By a decision (1558) the Idist Academy rejected every restriction concerning the use of lu. One may thus use that pronoun in exactly the same way for a thing and a person of obvious sex as for animals of unknown sex and a person that has a genderless name, like baby, child, human, etc., these being as truly masculine as feminine. 
 
The motives for this decision were given in "Mondo", XI, 68: Lu for the singular is exactly the same as li for the plural. Logic, symmetry and ease demand this. Consequently, just as li may be used for people, animals, and things whenever nothing obliges one to express the gender, so lu may be used for people, animals, and things under the same condition. The proposed distinction would be a bothersome subtlety&#160;... 
 
 Table of correlatives  
 
 
 
 What 
 That 
 Some 
 Any 
 No 
 Every 
 
 
 Person 
 qua/i 
 (i)ta/i 
 ulu/i 
 irgu/i 
 nulu/i 
 omnu/i 
 
 
 Thing 
 quo/i 
 (i)to/i 
 ulo/i 
 irgo/i 
 nulo/i 
 omno/i 
 
 
 Place 
 ube 
 ibe 
 ulaloke 
 irgaloke 
 nulaloke 
 omnaloke 
 
 
 Time 
 kande 
 lore 
 ulatempe 
 irgatempe 
 nulatempe 
 sempre 
 
 
 Way 
 quale 
 tale 
 ule 
 irge 
 nule 
 omne 
 
 
 Quantity 
 quanto 
 tanto 
 ulaquanto 
 irgaquanto 
 nulaquanto 
 omnaquanto 
 
 
 Vocabulary  
 Vocabulary in Ido is derived from French, Italian, Spanish, English, German, and Russian. Basing the vocabulary on various widespread languages was intended to make Ido as easy as possible for the greatest number of people possible. Early on, the first 5,371 Ido word roots were analyzed compared to the vocabulary of the six source languages, and the following result was found:  
 
 2024 roots (38%) belong to 6 languages 
 942 roots (17%) belong to 5 languages 
 1111 roots (21%) belong to 4 languages 
 585 roots (11%) belong to 3 languages 
 454 roots (8%) belong to 2 languages 
 255 roots (5%) belong to 1 language 
 
 Another analysis showed that: 
 
 4880 roots (91%) are found in French 
 4454 roots (83%) are found in Italian 
 4237 roots (79%) are found in Spanish 
 4219 roots (79%) are found in English 
 3302 roots (61%) are found in German 
 2821 roots (52%) are found in Russian 
 
 
 Comparison of Ido vocabulary with its six source languages 
 
 Ido 
 English 
 Italian 
 French 
 German 
 Russian 
 Spanish 
 
 
 bona 
 good ("bonus") 
 buono 
 bon 
 gut ("Bonus") 
 khoroshiy (хороший) 
 bueno 
 
 
 donar 
 give ("donate") 
 dare ("donare") 
 donner 
 geben 
 darit (дарить) 
 dar, donar 
 
 
 filtrar 
 filter 
 filtrare 
 filtrer 
 filtern 
 filtrovat (фильтровать) 
 filtrar 
 
 
 gardeno 
 garden 
 giardino 
 jardin 
 Garten 
 sad (caд) 
 jardín 
 
 
 kavalo 
 horse ("cavalry") 
 cavallo 
 cheval 
 Pferd ("Kavallerie") 
 loshad, kobyla (лошадь, кобыла) 
 caballo 
 
 
 maro 
 sea ("marine") 
 mare 
 mer 
 Meer 
 more (море) 
 mar 
 
 
 naciono 
 nation 
 nazione 
 nation 
 Nation 
 natsija (нация) 
 nación 
 
 
 studiar 
 study 
 studiare 
 étudier 
 studieren 
 izuchat, (изучать) 
 estudiar 
 
 
 yuna 
 young ("juvenile") 
 giovane 
 jeune 
 jung 
 yunyi, molodoy (юный, молодой) 
 joven 
 
 
 Vocabulary in Ido is often created through a number of official prefixes and suffixes that alter the meaning of the word. This allows a user to take existing words and modify them to create neologisms when necessary, and allows for a wide range of expression without the need to learn new vocabulary each time. Though their number is too large to be included in one article, some examples include: 
 
 The diminutive suffix -et- . Domo (house) becomes dometo (cottage), and libro (book) becomes libreto (novelette or short story). 
 The pejorative suffix -ach- . Domo becomes domacho (hovel), and libro becomes libracho (a shoddy piece of work, pulp fiction, etc.) 
 The prefix retro- , which implies a reversal. Irar (to go) becomes retroirar (to go back, backward) and venar (to come) becomes retrovenar (to return). 
 
 New vocabulary is generally created through an analysis of the word, its etymology , and reference to the six source languages. If a word can be created through vocabulary already existing in the language then it will usually be adopted without need for a new radical (such as wikipedio for Wikipedia , which consists of wiki + enciklopedio for encyclopedia ), and if not an entirely new word will be created. The word alternatoro for example was adopted in 1926, likely because five of the six source languages used largely the same orthography for the word, and because it was long enough to avoid being mistaken for other words in the existing vocabulary.  Adoption of a word is done through consensus, after which the word will be made official by the union . Care must also be taken to avoid homonyms if possible, and usually a new word undergoes some discussion before being adopted. Foreign words that have a restricted sense and are not likely to be used in everyday life (such as the word intifada to refer to the conflict between Israel and Palestine ) are left untouched, and often written in italics. 
 Ido, unlike Esperanto, does not assume the male sex by default. For example, Ido does not derive the word for waitress by adding a feminine suffix to waiter , as Esperanto does. Instead, Ido words are defined as sex-neutral, and two different suffixes derive masculine and feminine words from the root: servisto for a waiter of either sex, servistulo for a male waiter, and servistino for a waitress. There are only two exceptions to this rule:  
 Sample  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Lord's Prayer in Ido 
 
 Sorry, your browser either has JavaScript disabled or does not have any supported player. 
You can download the clip or download a player to play the clip in your browser. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Problems playing this file? See media help . 
 
 
 The Lord's Prayer : 
 
 
 Ido 
 Patro nia, qua esas en la cielo, 
tua nomo santigesez; 
tua regno advenez; 
tua volo facesez 
quale en la cielo, tale anke sur la tero. 
Donez a ni cadie l'omnadiala pano, 
e pardonez a ni nia ofensi, 
quale anke ni pardonas a nia ofensanti, 
e ne duktez ni aden la tento, 
ma liberigez ni del malajo. 
 
 English 
 Our Father in heaven, 
hallowed be your name. 
Your kingdom come, 
your will be done, 
on earth as it is in heaven. 
Give us this day our daily bread, 
and forgive us our debts, 
as we also have forgiven our debtors. 
And lead us not into temptation, 
but deliver us from evil. 
 
 
 
 Literature and publications  
 Ido has a number of publications that can be subscribed to or downloaded for free in most cases. Kuriero Internaciona is a magazine produced in France every few months with a range of topics. Adavane! is a magazine produced by the Spanish Ido Society every two months that has a range of topics, as well as a few dozen pages of work translated from other languages. Progreso is the official organ of the Ido movement and has been around since the inception of the movement in 1908. Other sites can be found with various stories, fables or proverbs along with a few books of the Bible translated into Ido on a smaller scale. The site publikaji has a few podcasts in Ido along with various songs and other recorded material. 
 The online encyclopedia Wikipedia includes an Ido-language edition (known in Ido as Wikipedio ); in January 2012 it was the 81st most visited Wikipedia.  
 International Ido conventions  
 
 2012: Dessau , Germany 
 2011: Echternach , Luxembourg ( Information ), 24 participants from 11 countries 
 2010: Tübingen , Germany ( Information ) 
 2009: Tallinn , Estonia ( Information ) 
 2008: Wuppertal - Neviges , Germany, participants from 5 countries ( Information ) 
 2007: Paris, France, 14 participants from 9 countries ( Information , Photos ) 
 2006: Berlin, Germany, approx. 25 participants from 10 countries ( Information ) 
 2005: Toulouse , France, 13 participants from 4 countries ( Information ) 
 2004: Kiev , Ukraine , 17 participants from 9 countries ( Information ) 
 2003: Großbothen , Germany, participants from 6 countries ( Information ) 
 2002: Kraków , Poland, 14 participants from 6 countries ( Information ) 
 2001: Nuremberg , Germany, 14 participants from 5 countries ( Information ) 
 1998: Białobrzegi , Poland, 15 participants from 6 countries 
 1997: Bakkum (mun. Castricum ), Netherlands, 19 participants from 7 countries 
 1995: Elsnigk , Germany 
 1991: Ostend , Belgium, 21 participants 
 1980: Namur , Belgium, 35 participants 
 1960: Zürich , Switzerland, ca. 50 participants 
 
 See also  
 
 
 
  
 Language portal 
 
 
  
 Constructed languages portal 
 
 
 
 
 Comparison between Esperanto and Ido 
 Comparison between Ido and Novial 
 Comparison between Ido and Interlingua 
 Interhelpo 
 
 References  
 
 
 ^  a   b  Blanke (2000), cited in Sabine Fiedler "Phraseology in planned languages" , Phraseology / Phraseologie, Walter de Gruyter 2007. pp. 779. 
 ^  "Esperanto-English Dictionary" . Retrieved 12 February 2012 . &#160; 
 ^  a   b  Guérard, A. L. "Chapter VII" . A Short History of the International Language Movement . Retrieved 12 February 2012 . &#160; 
 ^  a   b   c   d  Dyer, Luther H (1923). The Problem of an International Auxiliary Language and its Solution in Ido . pp.&#160;54–74 . Retrieved 12 February 2012 . &#160; 
 ^  Leau, Léopold (August 1933). "La Vereso pri la Delegitaro en 1907"  . Progreso X (96): 4 . Retrieved 12 February 2012 . &#160; 
 ^  Jacob, Henry (1947). "II. Ido" . A Planned Auxiliary Language . Retrieved 12 February 2012 . &#160; 
 ^  Lapenna, Ivo ; Ulrich Lins, Tazio Carlevaro (1974). Esperanto en perspektivo: Faktoj kaj analizoj pri la internacia lingvo (in Esperanto ). London: Centro de Esploro kaj Dokumentado pri la Monda Lingvo-Problemo. p.&#160;424. &#160; Cite uses deprecated parameters ( help ) 
 ^  Harlow, Donald J (4 July 2006). "Ido" . How to Build a Language . Retrieved 12 February 2012 . &#160; 
 ^  Harlow, Donald J (4 July 2006). "Novial" . How to Build a Language . Retrieved 12 February 2012 . &#160; 
 ^  MacLeod, Dave (23 November 2005). "Votez! Kande vu komencis lernar Ido?"  . Retrieved 19 January 2012 . &#160; 
 ^  a   b  Chandler, James (6 November 1997). "Changes in Ido since 1922" . Retrieved 19 January 2012 . &#160; 
 ^  "Listo di nova vorti propozita da la Linguala komitato dil Uniono" . Suplemento a la revuo Progreso numero 290 . ULI. &#160; 
 ^  BOL, Jacques (2004-11-15). "Pri Camiel de Cock" . &#160; 
 ^  Chandler, James (2006-04-16). "Lasta decido pri nova vorti" . &#160; 
 ^  Landais, Loïc (2008-02-17). "Nova DK di ULI por 2008–2011" . &#160; 
 ^  Neves, Gonçalo (2008-08-29). "demisiono ed adio" . &#160; 
 ^  Landais, Loïc (2009-09-28). "Linguala Komitato di ULI" . &#160; 
 ^  Richard, Gaël (2010-02-09). "RE:  Ube es komitato linguala" . &#160; 
 ^  "Linguala Komitato di ULI" . Uniono por la Linguo Internaciona Ido (ULI). &#160; 
 ^  Jibran (Partaka), Khalil (2010-04-16). "Ido havas nova Sekretario pri Linguala Questioni" . &#160; 
 ^  "Nomino di Sekretario por Linguala Questioni di ULI" . Uniono por la Linguo Internaciona Ido . 2010-04-03. &#160; 
 ^  Madonna, Tiberio (2011-01-01). "2esma raporto de la Linguala Komitato" . &#160; 
 ^  Chandler, James (2011-01-02). "RE:  2esma raporto de la Linguala Komitato" . &#160; 
 ^  "La Direktanta Komitato di ULI" . ULI. &#160; 
 ^  De Beaufront, L (2004). "Pronunco dil vokali"  . Kompleta Gramatiko Detaloza di Ido . p.&#160;7 . Retrieved 19 January 2012 . &#160; 
 ^  De Beaufront, L (2004). "Acento tonika"  . Kompleta Gramatiko Detaloza di Ido . pp.&#160;11–12 . Retrieved 19 January 2012 . &#160; 
 ^  a   b  De Beaufront, L (2004). "Kompleta Gramatiko Detaloza di Ido"  . pp.&#160;7–10 . Retrieved 19 January 2012 . &#160; 
 ^  Eventoj, no. 103, ISSN 01215-959 X. Ci estas senvalora balasto ( Ci is useless ballast). 1996. Available at http://www.eventoj.hu/arkivo/eve-103.htm 
 ^  Dyer, Luther H (1923). The Problem of an International Auxiliary Language and its Solution in Ido . pp.&#160;101–121 . Retrieved 19 January 2012 . &#160; 
 ^  De Cock, Camiel (1988). "Lexiko di nova vorti"  . Retrieved 19 January 2012 . &#160; 
 ^  ApGawain, Niklas; P.D. Hugon, J.L. Moore, L. de Beaufront (30 December 2008). Ido For All . pp.&#160;52, 70 . Retrieved 6 February 2012 . &#160; Cite uses deprecated parameters ( help ) 
 ^  Zachte, Erik (18 January 2012). "Page Views for Wikipedia, Non-mobile, Normalized" . Retrieved 19 January 2012 . &#160; 
 
 
 
 Additional notes 
 
 
 L. Couturat, L. Leau. Delegation pour l'adoption d'une Langue auxiliare internationale (15–24 October 1907). Coulommiers: Imprimerie Paul Brodard, 1907 
 
 External links  
 
 
 
 Ido edition of Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikibooks has more on the topic of: Ido (language) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Easy Ido 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ido language . 
 
 
 
 General information 
 
 
 The international language Ido 
 Union for the International Language Ido (in Ido) 
 The IDO foundation for language research in memory of Hellmut Röhnish 
 
 
 History and opinions 
 
 
 Langmaker.com about Ido 
 Otto Jespersen's history of Ido 
 Henry Jacob's history of Ido 
 Emile Boirac's "Report to the World Esperanto Congress, 1908" about his experiences as part of the Delegation's Committee 
 Léopold Leau's "The Truth About the Delegation in 1907" , a rebuttal of criticisms made about the events of the Delegation, based on his own experiences as a member of the Delegation 
 Richard Dalton's "Ido – Improved Esperanto or Confidence Trick" , a 2008 criticism of Ido based on contemporary knowledge of its history 
 "How to Build a Language", the section about Ido , and "Ido: The Beginning" by Don Harlow 
 Ido-Pagino da Ailanto – Discussion about Ido, links to websites, organizations, mailing lists, courses, dictionaries, grammars, etc. 
 Blueprints for Babel: Ido – Commentary and grammatical summary of Ido, with glossary and links 
 
 
 Places to learn Ido and pages in the language 
 
 
 Online Library of Free Books in Ido 
 Ido for all – English course for learning Ido 
 Ido Dictionaries by Dyer 
 Interactive English-Ido dictionary (in Ido) 
 Complete Detailed Grammar of the International Language Ido (in Ido) 
 Online Ido library (in Ido) 
 Examples of Ido Phrases 
 Reddit Community Devoted to the Ido Language 
 Parolez Ido: A social network in Ido 
 (English) Louis de Beaufront, Louis Couturat, Paul Hugon, English-international dictionary (1908) on http://www.archive.org 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 t 
 e 
 
 
 Constructed languages (conlangs) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Types and concepts 
 
 
 
 Artistic language 
 Constructed script 
 Engineered language 
 Fictional language 
 International auxiliary language (IAL) 
 Language game 
 Musical language 
 Relexification 
 Universal language 
 Zonal language 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Conlangs 
 
 
 
 Afrihili 
 Atlantean 
 Balaibalan 
 Blissymbols 
 Brithenig 
 Damin 
 Dothraki 
 Enochian 
 Esperanto 
 Glosa 
 Idiom Neutral 
 Ido 
 Interlingua 
 Ithkuil ( Ilaksh ) 
 Kalaba-X 
 Kēlen 
 Klingon 
 Láadan 
 Languages of Middle-earth 
 Langue nouvelle (1765) 
 Lingua Franca Nova 
 Lingua Ignota 
 Loglan 
 Lojban 
 Na'vi 
 Nadsat 
 Nal Bino 
 Neo 
 Novial 
 Occidental 
 Quenya 
 Ro 
 Sambahsa 
 Sindarin 
 Slovianski 
 Solresol 
 Sona 
 Spokil 
 Talossan 
 Teonaht 
 Toki Pona 
 Tsolyáni 
 Uropi 
 Valyrian 
 Verdurian 
 Volapük 
 Wenedyk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Resources 
 
 
 
 Codes for constructed languages 
 Conlanger 
 Language Creation Conference 
 Language Creation Society 
 Zompist.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Portal 
 WikiProject 
 List of constructed languages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 								 
				Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ido_(language)&amp;oldid=596267994 "				 
												 Categories : Languages with ISO 639-2 code Languages with ISO 639-1 code Constructed languages Esperantido Ido International auxiliary languages  Hidden categories: Pages containing cite templates with deprecated parameters Articles with hAudio microformats Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata  												 
							 
		 
		 
			 Navigation menu 
			 
				 
	 Personal tools 
	 
 Create account Log in 	 
 
				 
					 
	 Namespaces 
	 
					 Article 
					 Talk 
			 
 
 
	 
		 
	 Variants 
	 
		 
					 
	 
 
				 
				 
					 
	 Views 
	 
					 Read 
					 Edit 
					 View history 
			 
 
 
	 Actions 
	 
		 
					 
	 
 
 
	 Search 
	 
					 
					 		 
	 
 
				 
			 
			 
					 
				 
	 Navigation 
	 
		 
			 Main page 
			 Contents 
			 Featured content 
			 Current events 
			 Random article 
			 Donate to Wikipedia 
			 Wikimedia Shop 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Interaction 
	 
		 
			 Help 
			 About Wikipedia 
			 Community portal 
			 Recent changes 
			 Contact page 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Tools 
	 
		 
			 What links here 
			 Related changes 
			 Upload file 
			 Special pages 
			 Permanent link 
			 Page information 
			 Data item 
 Cite this page 		 
	 
 
 
	 Print/export 
	 
		 
			 Create a book 
			 Download as PDF 
			 Printable version 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Languages 
	 
		 
			 Afrikaans 
			 Alemannisch 
			 Аҧсшәа 
			 العربية 
			 Aragonés 
			 Arpetan 
			 Asturianu 
			 Aymar aru 
			 Azərbaycanca 
			 Беларуская 
			 Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ 
			 Български 
			 Català 
			 Čeština 
			 Dansk 
			 Deutsch 
			 Eesti 
			 Ελληνικά 
			 Emiliàn e rumagnòl 
			 Español 
			 Esperanto 
			 Euskara 
			 فارسی 
			 Français 
			 Frysk 
			 Fulfulde 
			 Gaeilge 
			 Galego 
			 客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî 
			 한국어 
			 Hausa 
			 Հայերեն 
			 हिन्दी 
			 Hrvatski 
			 Ido 
			 Ilokano 
			 Bahasa Indonesia 
			 Interlingua 
			 Interlingue 
			 Íslenska 
			 Italiano 
			 עברית 
			 ქართული 
			 Қазақша 
			 Kiswahili 
			 Коми 
			 Kurdî 
			 Ladino 
			 Latina 
			 Latviešu 
			 Lëtzebuergesch 
			 Lietuvių 
			 Ligure 
			 Limburgs 
			 Magyar 
			 Македонски 
			 Malti 
			 مازِرونی 
			 Bahasa Melayu 
			 Mirandés 
			 Nederlands 
			 日本語 
			 Norsk bokmål 
			 Norsk nynorsk 
			 Novial 
			 Occitan 
			 پنجابی 
			 Papiamentu 
			 Picard 
			 Piemontèis 
			 Tok Pisin 
			 Plattdüütsch 
			 Polski 
			 Português 
			 Română 
			 Rumantsch 
			 Русский 
			 Sardu 
			 Scots 
			 Shqip 
			 Simple English 
			 SiSwati 
			 Slovenčina 
			 Slovenščina 
			 Soomaaliga 
			 Српски / srpski 
			 Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски 
			 Suomi 
			 Svenska 
			 தமிழ் 
			 ไทย 
			 Türkçe 
			 Українська 
			 Vèneto 
			 Tiếng Việt 
			 Volapük 
			 Zazaki 
			 中文 
			 
			 Edit links 
		 
	 
 
			 
		 
		 
							 
											 This page was last modified on 20 February 2014 at 00:57. 
											 Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. 
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
									 
							 
											 Privacy policy 
											 About Wikipedia 
											 Disclaimers 
											 Contact Wikipedia 
											 Developers 
											 Mobile view