Japanese language - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 





 
 
		 
		 
		 
			 
			 
						 
						 Japanese language 
			 
								 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
								 
												 
					Jump to:					 navigation , 					 search 
				 
				 Not to be confused with Javanese language . 
 
 
 Japanese 
 
 
 日本語 Nihongo 
 
 
  
 Nihongo ( Japanese ) 
in Japanese script 
 
 
 
 Pronunciation 
 /nihoɴɡo/ :  
 
 
 Native&#160;to 
 Japan 
 
 
 Ethnicity 
 Japanese ( Yamato ) 
 
 
 
 Native speakers 
 
 125 million &#160;(2010)  
 
 
 
 Language family 
 
 
 Altaic ? ( controversial )
 
 Japonic 
 
 Japanese 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Early forms 
 
 
 Old Japanese 
 
 Early Middle Japanese 
 
 Late Middle Japanese 
 
 Early Modern Japanese 
 
 Japanese 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Writing system 
 
 
 
 
 Chinese characters ( kanji ) 
 Kana 
 
 hiragana 
 katakana 
 
 
 Japanese Braille 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Signed form(s) 
 
 Signed Japanese 
 
 
 Official status 
 
 
 
 Recognised minority language&#160;in 
 
 &#160; Palau 
 
 
 Language codes 
 
 
 ISO 639-1 
 ja 
 
 
 ISO 639-2 
 jpn 
 
 
 ISO 639-3 
 jpn 
 
 
 Linguasphere 
 45-CAA-a 
 
 
 This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. 
 
 
 
 
 
 This article contains Japanese text. Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of kanji and kana . 
 
 
 Japanese ( 日本語 , Nihongo ? ,  &#160;(  listen ) ) is an East Asian language spoken by about 125 million speakers, primarily in Japan , where it is the national language . It is a member of the Japonic (or Japanese- Ryukyuan ) language family, whose relation to other language groups, particularly to Korean and the suggested Altaic language family, is debated. 
 Little is known of the language's prehistory, or when it first appeared in Japan. Chinese documents from the 3rd century recorded a few Japanese words, but substantial texts did not appear until the 8th century. During the Heian period (794–1185), Chinese had a considerable influence on the vocabulary and phonology of Old Japanese . Late Middle Japanese (1185–1600) saw changes in features that brought it closer to the modern language, as well the first appearance of European loanwords . The standard dialect moved from the Kansai region to the Edo (modern Tokyo ) region in the Early Modern Japanese period (early 17th century–mid-19th century). Following the end in 1853 of Japan's self-imposed isolation , the flow of loanwords from European languages increased significantly. English loanwords in particular have become frequent, and Japanese words from English roots have proliferated. 
 Japanese is an agglutinative , mora -timed language with simple phonotactics , a pure vowel system, phonemic vowel and consonant length, and a lexically significant pitch-accent . Word order is normally subject–object–verb with particles marking the grammatical function of words, and sentence structure is topic–comment . Sentence-final particles are used to add emotional or emphatic impact, or make questions. Nouns have no grammatical number or gender, and there are no articles . Verbs are conjugated , primarily for tense and voice , but not person . Japanese equivalents of adjectives are also conjugated. Japanese has a complex system of honorifics with verb forms and vocabulary to indicate the relative status of the speaker, the listener, and persons mentioned. 
 Japanese has no genealogical relationship with Chinese , but it makes extensive use of Chinese characters , or kanji ( 漢字 ? ) , in its writing system, and a large portion of its vocabulary is borrowed from Chinese . Along with kanji , the Japanese writing system primarily uses two syllabic (or moraic ) scripts, hiragana ( ひらがな or 平仮名 ? ) and katakana ( カタカナ or 片仮名 ? ) . Latin script is used in a limited way, such as for imported acronyms, and the numeral system uses mostly Arabic numerals , alongside traditional Chinese numerals . Japanese was little studied by non-Japanese before the Japanese economic bubble of the 1980s. Since then, along with the spread of Japanese popular culture , the number of students of Japanese has reached the millions. 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 1.1 Prehistory 
 1.2 Old Japanese 
 1.3 Early Middle Japanese 
 1.4 Late Middle Japanese 
 1.5 Modern Japanese 
 
 
 2 Geographic distribution 
 
 2.1 Official status 
 2.2 Dialects 
 
 
 3 Classification 
 
 3.1 Korean hypothesis 
 3.2 Altaic hypothesis 
 
 
 4 Phonology 
 5 Grammar 
 
 5.1 Sentence structure 
 5.2 Inflection and conjugation 
 5.3 Politeness 
 
 
 6 Vocabulary 
 7 Writing system 
 8 Study by non-native speakers 
 9 See also 
 10 Notes 
 11 References 
 12 Works cited 
 13 Further reading 
 14 External links 
 
 
 
 History  
 Prehistory  
 A common ancestor of Japanese and Ryukyuan languages or dialects is thought  including the ancestor of the modern Ainu language . Very little is known about the Japanese of this period – because writing had yet to be introduced from China, there is no direct evidence; so anything that can be discerned about this period of Japanese must be based on the reconstructions of Old Japanese . 
 Old Japanese  
 
 
 
  
A page from Nihon Shoki ( The Chronicles of Japan ), the second oldest book of classical Japanese history . 
 
 
 Main article: Old Japanese 
 Old Japanese is the oldest attested stage of the Japanese language. Through the spread of Buddhism , the Chinese writing system was imported to Japan. The earliest texts found in Japan are written in Classical Chinese , but they may have been meant to be read as Japanese by the kanbun method. Some of these Chinese texts show the influences of Japanese grammar, such as the word order (for example, placing the verb after the object). In these "hybrid" texts, Chinese characters are also occasionally used phonetically to represent Japanese particles . The earliest text, the Kojiki , dates to the early 8th century, and was written entirely in Chinese characters. The end of Old Japanese coincides with the end of the Nara period in 794. Old Japanese uses the Man'yōgana system of writing, which uses kanji for their phonetic as well as semantic values. Based on the Man'yōgana system, Old Japanese can be reconstructed as having 88 distinct syllables. Texts written with Man'yōgana use two different kanji for each of the syllables now pronounced き ki, ひ hi, み mi, け ke, へ he, め me, こ ko, そ so, と to, の no, も mo, よ yo and ろ ro .  (The Kojiki has 88, but all later texts have 87. The distinction between mo 1 and mo 2 apparently was lost immediately following its composition.) This set of syllables shrank to 67 in Early Middle Japanese , though some were added through Chinese influence. 
 Due to these extra syllables, it has been hypothesized that Old Japanese's vowel system was larger than that of Modern Japanese – it perhaps contained up to eight vowels. According to Shinkichi Hashimoto , the extra syllables in Man'yōgana derive from differences between the vowels of the syllables in question.  However, it is not fully certain that the alternation between syllables necessarily reflects a difference in the vowels rather than the consonants – at the moment, the only undisputed fact is that they are different syllables. 
 Old Japanese does not have /h/ , but rather /ɸ/ (preserved in modern fu , /ɸɯ/ ), which has been reconstructed to an earlier /*p/ . Man'yōgana also has a symbol for /je/ , which merges with /e/ before the end of the period. 
 Several fossilizations of Old Japanese grammatical elements remain in the modern language – the genitive particle tsu (superseded by modern no ) is preserved in words such as matsuge ("eyelash", lit. "hair of the eye"); modern mieru ("to be visible") and kikoeru ("to be audible") retain what may have been a frequentative suffix - ru ( kikoyu → kikoyuru (the attributive form, which slowly replaced the plain form starting in the late Heian period) &gt; kikoeru (as all shimo-nidan verbs in modern Japanese did)); and the genitive particle ga remains in intentionally archaic speech. 
 Early Middle Japanese  
 
 
 
  
Two pages from a 12th-century emaki scroll of The Tale of Genji from the 11th century. 
 
 
 Main article: Early Middle Japanese 
 Early Middle Japanese is the Japanese of the Heian period , from 794 to 1185. Early Middle Japanese sees a significant amount of Chinese influence on the language's phonology – length distinctions become phonemic for both consonants and vowels, and series of both labialised (e.g. kwa ) and palatalised ( kya ) consonants are added.  Intervocalic /ɸ/ merges with /w/ by the 11th century. The end of Early Middle Japanese sees the beginning of a shift where the attributive form (Japanese rentaikei ) slowly replaces the uninflected form ( shūshikei ) for those verb classes where the two were distinct. 
 Late Middle Japanese  
 Main article: Late Middle Japanese 
 Late Middle Japanese covers the years from 1185 to 1600, and is normally divided into two sections, roughly equivalent to the Kamakura period and the Muromachi period , respectively. The later forms of Late Middle Japanese are the first to be described by non-native sources, in this case the Jesuit and Franciscan missionaries; and thus there is better documentation of Late Middle Japanese phonology than for previous forms (for instance, the Arte da Lingoa de Iapam ). Among other sound changes, the sequence /au/ merges to /ɔː/ , in contrast with /oː/ ; /p/ is reintroduced from Chinese; and /we/ merges with /je/ . Some forms rather more familiar to Modern Japanese speakers begin to appear – the continuative ending - te begins to reduce onto the verb (e.g. yonde for earlier yomite ), the -k- in the final syllable of adjectives drops out ( shiroi for earlier shiroki ); and some forms exist where modern standard Japanese has retained the earlier form (e.g. hayaku &gt; hayau &gt; hayɔɔ , where modern Japanese just has hayaku , though the alternative form is preserved in the standard greeting o-hayō gozaimasu "good morning"; this ending is also seen in o-medetō "congratulations", from medetaku ). 
 Late Middle Japanese has the first loanwords from European languages – now-common words borrowed into Japanese in this period include pan ("bread") and tabako ("tobacco", now "cigarette"), both from Portuguese . 
 Modern Japanese  
 See also: Early Modern Japanese 
 Modern Japanese is considered to begin with the Edo period in 1600. Since Old Japanese, the de facto standard Japanese had been the Kansai dialect, especially that of Kyoto. However, during the Edo period, Edo (now Tokyo) developed into the largest city in Japan, and the Edo-area dialect became standard Japanese. Since the end of Japan's self-imposed isolation in 1853, the flow of loanwords from European languages has increased significantly. The period since 1945 has seen a large number of words borrowed from English,  
 Geographic distribution  
 Although Japanese is spoken almost exclusively in Japan, it has been spoken outside. Before and during World War II , when Japan occupied Korea , Taiwan , parts of China , the Philippines , and various Pacific islands,  locals in those countries learned Japanese as the language of the empire. As a result, many elderly people in these countries can still speak Japanese. 
 Japanese emigrant communities (the largest of which are to be found in Brazil ,  
 Official status  
 Japanese has no official status ,  but is the de facto national language . There is a form of the language considered standard: hyōjungo ( 標準語 ? ) , meaning "standard Japanese", or kyōtsūgo ( 共通語 ? ) , "common language". The meaning of the two terms are almost the same. Hyōjungo or kyōtsūgo is a conception that forms the counterpart of dialect. This normative language was born after the Meiji Restoration ( 明治維新 , meiji ishin ? , 1868) from the language spoken in the higher-class areas of Tokyo (see Yamanote ) for communicating necessity. Hyōjungo is taught in schools and used on television and even in official communications. It is the version of Japanese discussed in this article. 
 Formerly, standard Japanese in writing ( 文語 , bungo  ? , "literary language") was different from colloquial language ( 口語 , kōgo  ? ) . The two systems have different rules of grammar and some variance in vocabulary. Bungo was the main method of writing Japanese until about 1900; since then kōgo gradually extended its influence and the two methods were both used in writing until the 1940s. Bungo still has some relevance for historians, literary scholars, and lawyers (many Japanese laws that survived World War II are still written in bungo , although there are ongoing efforts to modernize their language). Kōgo is the dominant method of both speaking and writing Japanese today, although bungo grammar and vocabulary are occasionally used in modern Japanese for effect. 
 Dialects  
 Main article: Japanese dialects 
 See also: Japanese Archipelago 
 
 
 
  
Map of Japanese dialects and Japonic languages 
 
 
 Dozens of dialects are spoken in Japan. The profusion is due to many factors, including the length of time the archipelago has been inhabited, its mountainous island terrain, and Japan's long history of both external and internal isolation. Dialects typically differ in terms of pitch accent , inflectional morphology , vocabulary , and particle usage. Some even differ in vowel and consonant inventories, although this is uncommon. 
 The main distinction in Japanese accents is between Tokyo-type ( 東京式 , Tōkyō-shiki ? ) and Kyoto-Osaka-type ( 京阪式 , Keihan-shiki ? ) . Within each type are several subdivisions. Kyoto-Osaka-type dialects are in the central region, roughly formed by Kansai , Shikoku , and western Hokuriku regions . 
 Dialects from peripheral regions, such as Tōhoku or Kagoshima , may be unintelligible to speakers from the other parts of the country. There are some language islands in mountain villages or isolated islands such as Hachijō-jima island whose dialect are descended from the Eastern dialect of Old Japanese . Dialects of the Kansai region are spoken or known by many Japanese, and Osaka dialect in particular is associated with comedy (see Kansai dialect ). Dialects of Tōhoku and North Kantō are associated with typical farmers. 
 The Ryūkyūan languages , spoken in Okinawa and the Amami Islands (politically part of Kagoshima ), are distinct enough to be considered a separate branch of the Japonic family; not only is each language unintelligible to Japanese speakers, but most are unintelligible to those who speak other Ryūkyūan languages. However, in contrast to linguists, many ordinary Japanese people tend to consider the Ryūkyūan languages as dialects of Japanese. This is the result of the official language policy of the Japanese government, which has declared those languages to be dialects and prohibited their use in schools. 
 Standard Japanese has become prevalent nationwide (including the Ryūkyū islands) due to education , mass media , and an increase of mobility within Japan, as well as economic integration. 
 Classification  
 See also: Classification of Japonic 
 Japanese is a member of the Japonic languages family, which also includes the languages spoken throughout the Ryūkyū Islands . As these closely related languages are commonly treated as dialects of the same language, Japanese is often called a language isolate . 
 According to Martine Irma Robbeets, Japanese has been subject to more attempts to show its relation to other languages than any other language in the world.  
 Korean hypothesis  
 Similarities between Korean and Japanese were noted by Arai Hakuseki in 1717,  
 Altaic hypothesis  
 
 
 
  
Distribution of the proposed Altaic languages across Eurasia , tentatively including Japanese and Korean . 
 
 
 The proposed Altaic family of languages, which would include languages from far eastern Europe to northeastern Asia, has had its supporters and detractors over its history. The most controversial aspect of the hypothesis is the proposed inclusion of Korean and Japanese, which even some proponents of Altaic have rejected.  
 Skepticism over the Japanese relation to Altaic is widespread amongst both amateurs and professionals, in part because of the large number of unsuccessful attempts to genealogical relationships with Japanese and other languages.  
 Phonology  
 Main article: Japanese phonology 
 
 
  
 This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. 
 
 
 All Japanese vowels are pure—that is, there are no diphthongs , only monophthongs . The only unusual vowel is the high back vowel /ɯ/  &#160; listen &#160; ( help · info ) , which is like /u/ , but compressed instead of rounded. Japanese has five vowels, and vowel length is phonemic, with each having both a short and a long version. Elongated vowels are usually denoted with a line over the vowel (a macron ) in rōmaji , a repeated vowel character in hiragana , or a chōonpu succeeding the vowel in katakana . 
 Some Japanese consonants have several allophones , which may give the impression of a larger inventory of sounds. However, some of these allophones have since become phonemic. For example, in the Japanese language up to and including the first half of the 20th century, the phonemic sequence /ti/ was palatalized and realized phonetically as  "social status". 
 The "r" of the Japanese language (technically a lateral apical postalveolar flap), is of particular interest, sounding to most English speakers to be something between an "l" and a retroflex "r" depending on its position in a word. The "g" is also notable; unless it starts a sentence, it is pronounced /ŋ/ , like the ng in "sing," in the Kanto prestige dialect and in other eastern dialects. 
 The syllabic structure and the phonotactics are very simple: the only consonant clusters allowed within a syllable consist of one of a subset of the consonants plus /j/ . These type of clusters only occur in onsets. However, consonant clusters across syllables are allowed as long as the two consonants are a nasal followed by a homorganic consonant. Consonant length (gemination) is also phonemic. 
 Grammar  
 
 
 
 
 
 This section includes a list of references , related reading or external links , but the sources of this section remain unclear because it lacks inline citations . Please improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (November 2013) 
 
 
 Main article: Japanese grammar 
 Sentence structure  
 Japanese word order is classified as subject–object–verb . Unlike many Indo-European languages , the only strict rule of word order is that the verb must be placed at the end of a sentence (possibly followed by sentence-end particles). This is because Japanese sentence elements are marked with particles that identify their grammatical functions. 
 The basic sentence structure is topic–comment . For example, Kochira wa Tanaka-san desu ( こちらは田中さんです ). kochira ("this") is the topic of the sentence, indicated by the particle wa . The verb de aru ( desu is a contraction of its polite form de arimasu ) is a copula , commonly translated as "to be" or "it is" (though there are other verbs that can be translated as "to be"), though technically it holds no meaning and is used to give a sentence 'politeness'. As a phrase, Tanaka-san desu is the comment. This sentence literally translates to "As for this person, (it) is Mr./Ms. Tanaka." Thus Japanese, like many other Asian languages, is often called a topic-prominent language , which means it has a strong tendency to indicate the topic separately from the subject, and that the two do not always coincide. The sentence Zō wa hana ga nagai ( 象は鼻が長い ) literally means, "As for elephant(s), (the) nose(s) (is/are) long". The topic is zō "elephant", and the subject is hana "nose". 
 In Japanese, the subject or object of a sentence need not be stated if it is obvious from context. As a result of this grammatical permissiveness, there is a tendency to gravitate towards brevity; Japanese speakers tend to omit pronouns on the theory they are inferred from the previous sentence, and are therefore understood. In the context of the above example, hana-ga nagai would mean "!". 
 While the language has some words that are typically translated as pronouns, these are not used as frequently as pronouns in some Indo-European languages, and function differently. In some cases Japanese relies on special verb forms and auxiliary verbs to indicate the direction of benefit of an action: "down" to indicate the out-group gives a benefit to the in-group; and "up" to indicate the in-group gives a benefit to the out-group. Here, the in-group includes the speaker and the out-group does not, and their boundary depends on context. For example, oshiete moratta ( 教えてもらった ) (literally, "explained" with a benefit from the out-group to the in-group) means "". Such beneficiary auxiliary verbs thus serve a function comparable to that of pronouns and prepositions in Indo-European languages to indicate the actor and the recipient of an action. 
 Japanese "pronouns" also function differently from most modern Indo-European pronouns (and more like nouns) in that they can take modifiers as any other noun may. For instance, one does not say in English: 
 
 *The amazed he ran down the street. (grammatically incorrect insertion of a pronoun) 
 
 But one can grammatically say essentially the same thing in Japanese: 
 
 驚いた彼は道を走っていった。 
 Odoroita kare wa michi o hashitte itta. (grammatically correct) 
 
 This is partly because these words evolved from regular nouns, such as kimi "you" ( 君 "lord"), anata "you" ( あなた "that side, yonder"), and boku "I" ( 僕 "servant"). This is why some linguists do not classify Japanese "pronouns" as pronouns, but rather as referential nouns, much like Spanish usted (contracted from vuestra merced , "your  grace") or Portuguese o senhor . Japanese personal pronouns are generally used only in situations requiring special emphasis as to who is doing what to whom. 
 The choice of words used as pronouns is correlated with the sex of the speaker and the social situation in which they are spoken: men and women alike in a formal situation generally refer to themselves as watashi ( 私 "private") or watakushi (also 私 ), while men in rougher or intimate conversation are much more likely to use the word ore ( 俺 "oneself", "myself") or boku . Similarly, different words such as anata , kimi , and omae ( お前 , more formally 御前 "the one before me") may be used to refer to a listener depending on the listener's relative social position and the degree of familiarity between the speaker and the listener. When used in different social relationships, the same word may have positive (intimate or respectful) or negative (distant or disrespectful) connotations. 
 Japanese often use titles of the person referred to where pronouns would be used in English. For example, when speaking to one's teacher, it is appropriate to use sensei ( 先生 , teacher), but inappropriate to use anata . This is because anata is used to refer to people of equal or lower status, and one's teacher has higher status. 
 Inflection and conjugation  
 Japanese nouns have no grammatical number, gender or article aspect. The noun hon ( 本 ) may refer to a single book or several books; hito ( 人 ) can mean "person" or "people"; and ki ( 木 ) can be "tree" or "trees". Where number is important, it can be indicated by providing a quantity (often with a counter word ) or (rarely) by adding a suffix, or sometimes by duplication (e.g. 人人 , hitobito , usually written with an iteration mark as 人々 ). Words for people are usually understood as singular. Thus Tanaka-san usually means Mr./Ms. Tanaka . Words that refer to people and animals can be made to indicate a group of individuals through the addition of a collective suffix (a noun suffix that indicates a group), such as -tachi , but this is not a true plural: the meaning is closer to the English phrase "and company". A group described as Tanaka-san-tachi may include people not named Tanaka. Some Japanese nouns are effectively plural, such as hitobito "people" and wareware "we/us", while the word tomodachi "friend" is considered singular, although plural in form. 
 Verbs are conjugated to show tenses, of which there are two: past and present (or non-past) which is used for the present and the future. For verbs that represent an ongoing process, the -te iru form indicates a continuous (or progressive) aspect , similar to the suffix ing in English. For others that represent a change of state, the -te iru form indicates a perfect aspect. For example, kite iru means "He has come (and is still here)", but tabete iru means "He is eating". 
 Questions (both with an interrogative pronoun and yes/no questions) have the same structure as affirmative sentences, but with intonation rising at the end. In the formal register, the question particle -ka is added. For example, ii desu ( いいです ) "It is OK" becomes ii desu-ka ( いいですか。 ) "Is it OK?". In a more informal tone sometimes the particle -no ( の ) is added instead to show a personal interest of the speaker: Dōshite konai-no? "Why aren't (you) coming?". Some simple queries are formed simply by mentioning the topic with an interrogative intonation to call for the hearer's attention: Kore wa? "(What about) this?"; O-namae wa? ( お名前は？ ) "(What's your) name?". 
 Negatives are formed by inflecting the verb. For example, Pan o taberu ( パンを食べる。 ) "I will eat bread" or "I eat bread" becomes Pan o tabenai ( パンを食べない。 ) "I will not eat bread" or "I do not eat bread". Plain negative forms are actually i -adjectives (see below) and inflect as such, e.g. Pan o tabenakatta ( パンを食べなかった。 ) "I did not eat bread". 
 The so-called -te verb form is used for a variety of purposes: either progressive or perfect aspect (see above); combining verbs in a temporal sequence ( Asagohan o tabete sugu dekakeru "I'll eat breakfast and leave at once"), simple commands, conditional statements and permissions ( Dekakete-mo ii? "May I go out?"), etc. 
 The word da (plain), desu (polite) is the copula verb. It corresponds approximately to the English be , but often takes on other roles, including a marker for tense, when the verb is conjugated into its past form datta (plain), deshita (polite). This comes into use because only i -adjectives and verbs can carry tense in Japanese. Two additional common verbs are used to indicate existence ("there is") or, in some contexts, property: aru (negative nai ) and iru (negative inai ), for inanimate and animate things, respectively. For example, Neko ga iru "There's a cat", Ii kangae-ga nai " haven't got a good idea". 
 The verb "to do" ( suru , polite form shimasu ) is often used to make verbs from nouns ( ryōri suru "to cook", benkyō suru "to study", etc.) and has been productive in creating modern slang words. Japanese also has a huge number of compound verbs to express concepts that are described in English using a verb and an adverbial particle (e.g. tobidasu "to fly out, to flee," from tobu "to fly, to jump" + dasu "to put out, to emit"). 
 There are three types of adjective (see Japanese adjectives ): 
 
 形容詞 keiyōshi , or i adjectives, which have a conjugating ending i ( い ) (such as 暑い atsui "to be hot") which can become past ( 暑かった atsukatta "it was hot"), or negative ( 暑くない atsuku nai "it is not hot"). Note that nai is also an i adjective, which can become past ( 暑くなかった atsuku nakatta "it was not hot").
 
 暑い日 atsui hi "a hot day". 
 
 
 形容動詞 keiyōdōshi , or na adjectives, which are followed by a form of the copula , usually na . For example hen (strange)
 
 変なひと hen na hito "a strange person". 
 
 
 連体詞 rentaishi , also called true adjectives, such as ano "that"
 
 あの山 ano yama "that mountain". 
 
 
 
 Both keiyōshi and keiyōdōshi may predicate sentences. For example, 
 
 ご飯が熱い。 Gohan ga atsui. "The rice is hot." 
 彼は変だ。 Kare wa hen da. "He's strange." 
 
 Both inflect, though they do not show the full range of conjugation found in true verbs. The rentaishi in Modern Japanese are few in number, and unlike the other words, are limited to directly modifying nouns. They never predicate sentences. Examples include ookina "big", kono "this", iwayuru "so-called" and taishita "amazing". 
 Both keiyōdōshi and keiyōshi form adverbs , by following with ni in the case of keiyōdōshi : 
 
 変になる hen ni naru "become strange", 
 
 and by changing i to ku in the case of keiyōshi : 
 
 熱くなる atsuku naru "become hot". 
 
 The grammatical function of nouns is indicated by postpositions , also called particles . These include for example: 
 
 が ga for the nominative case . Not necessarily a subject. 
 
 
 彼が やった。 Kare ga yatta. " He did it." 
 
 
 に ni for the dative case . 
 
 
 田中さんに あげて下さい。 Tanaka-san ni agete kudasai "Please give it to Mr. Tanaka ." 
 
 It is also used for the lative case, indicating a motion to a location. 
 
 日本に 行きたい。 Nihon ni ikitai "I want to go to Japan ." 
 
 
 However, へ e is more commonly used for the lative case. 
 
 
 パーティーへ 行かないか。 pātī e ikanai ka? "Won't you go to the party ?" 
 
 
 の no for the genitive case , or nominalizing phrases. 
 
 
 私の カメラ。 watashi no kamera " my camera" 
 スキーに行く の が好きです。 Sukī-ni iku no ga suki desu "(I) like go ing skiing." 
 
 
 を o for the accusative case . Not necessarily an object. 
 
 
 何を 食べますか。 Nani o tabemasu ka? " What will (you) eat?" 
 
 
 は wa for the topic. It can co-exist with the case markers listed above, and it overrides ga and (in most cases) o . 
 
 
 私は 寿司がいいです。 Watashi wa sushi ga ii desu. (literally) " As for me , sushi is good." The nominative marker ga after watashi is hidden under wa . 
 
 Note: The subtle difference between wa and ga in Japanese cannot be derived from the English language as such, because the distinction between sentence topic and subject is not made there. While wa indicates the topic, which the rest of the sentence describes or acts upon, it carries the implication that the subject indicated by wa is not unique, or may be part of a larger group. 
 
 Ikeda-san wa yonjū-ni sai da. "As for Mr. Ikeda, he is forty-two years old." Others in the group may also be of that age. 
 
 Absence of wa often means the subject is the focus of the sentence. 
 
 Ikeda-san ga yonjū-ni sai da. "It is Mr. Ikeda who is forty-two years old." This is a reply to an implicit or explicit question, such as "who in this group is forty-two years old?" 
 
 Politeness  
 Main article: Honorific speech in Japanese 
 Japanese has an extensive grammatical system to express politeness and formality. 
 The Japanese language can express differing levels in social status. The differences in social position are determined by a variety of factors including job, age, experience, or even psychological state (e.g., a person asking a favour tends to do so politely). The person in the lower position is expected to use a polite form of speech, whereas the other person might use a plainer form. Strangers will also speak to each other politely. Japanese children rarely use polite speech until they are teens, at which point they are expected to begin speaking in a more adult manner. See uchi-soto . 
 Whereas teineigo ( 丁寧語 ) (polite language) is commonly an inflectional system, sonkeigo ( 尊敬語 ) (respectful language) and kenjōgo ( 謙譲語 ) (humble language) often employ many special honorific and humble alternate verbs: iku "go" becomes ikimasu in polite form, but is replaced by irassharu in honorific speech and ukagau or mairu in humble speech. 
 The difference between honorific and humble speech is particularly pronounced in the Japanese language. Humble language is used to talk about oneself or one's own group (company, family) whilst honorific language is mostly used when describing the interlocutor and their group. For example, the -san suffix ("Mr" "Mrs." or "Miss") is an example of honorific language. It is not used to talk about oneself or when talking about someone from one's company to an external person, since the company is the speaker's "group". When speaking directly to one's superior in one's company or when speaking with other employees within one's company about a superior, a Japanese person will use vocabulary and inflections of the honorific register to refer to the in-group superior and their speech and actions. When speaking to a person from another company (i.e., a member of an out-group), however, a Japanese person will use the plain or the humble register to refer to the speech and actions of their own in-group superiors. In short, the register used in Japanese to refer to the person, speech, or actions of any particular individual varies depending on the relationship (either in-group or out-group) between the speaker and listener, as well as depending on the relative status of the speaker, listener, and third-person referents. 
 Most nouns in the Japanese language may be made polite by the addition of o- or go- as a prefix. o- is generally used for words of native Japanese origin, whereas go- is affixed to words of Chinese derivation. In some cases, the prefix has become a fixed part of the word, and is included even in regular speech, such as gohan 'cooked rice; meal.' Such a construction often indicates deference to either the item's owner or to the object itself. For example, the word tomodachi 'friend,' would become o-tomodachi when referring to the friend of someone of higher status (though mothers often use this form to refer to their children's friends). On the other hand, a polite speaker may sometimes refer to mizu 'water' as o-mizu in order to show politeness. 
 Most Japanese people employ politeness to indicate a lack of familiarity. That is, they use polite forms for new acquaintances, but if a relationship becomes more intimate, they no longer use them. This occurs regardless of age, social class, or gender. 
 Vocabulary  
 Further information: Yamato kotoba &#160;and&#160; Gairaigo 
 The original language of Japan, or at least the original language of a certain population that was ancestral to a significant portion of the historical and present Japanese nation, was the so-called yamato kotoba ( 大和言葉 or infrequently 大和詞 , i.e. " Yamato words"), which in scholarly contexts is sometimes referred to as wago ( 和語 or rarely 倭語 , i.e. the " Wa words"). In addition to words from this original language, present-day Japanese includes a number of words that were either borrowed from Chinese or constructed from Chinese roots following Chinese patterns. These words, known as kango ( 漢語 ), entered the language from the 5th century onwards via contact with Chinese culture. According to the Shinsen Kokugo Jiten (新選国語辞典) Japanese dictionary , kango comprise 49.1% of the total vocabulary, wago make up 33.8%, other foreign words or gairaigo ( 外来語 ) account for 8.8%, and the remaining 8.3% constitute hybridized words or konshugo ( 混種語 ) that draw elements from more than one language.  
 There are also a great number of words of mimetic origin in Japanese, with Japanese having a rich collection of sound symbolism , both onomatopoeia for physical sounds, and more abstract words. A small number of words have come into Japanese from the Ainu language . Tonakai ( reindeer ), rakko ( sea otter ) and shishamo ( smelt , a type of fish) are well-known examples of words of Ainu origin. 
 Words of different origins occupy different registers in Japanese. Like Latin-derived words in English, kango words are typically perceived as somewhat formal or academic compared to equivalent Yamato words. Indeed, it is generally fair to say that an English word derived from Latin/French roots typically corresponds to a Sino-Japanese word in Japanese, whereas a simpler Anglo-Saxon word would best be translated by a Yamato equivalent. 
 Incorporating vocabulary from European languages began with borrowings from Portuguese in the 16th century, followed by words from Dutch during Japan's long isolation of the Edo period . With the Meiji Restoration and the reopening of Japan in the 19th century, borrowing occurred from German , French , and English . Today most borrowings are from English. 
 In the Meiji era, the Japanese also coined many neologisms using Chinese roots and morphology to translate European concepts;  
 In the past few decades, wasei-eigo ("made-in-Japan English") has become a prominent phenomenon. Words such as wanpatān ワンパターン (&lt; one + pattern , "to be in a rut", "to have a one-track mind") and sukinshippu スキンシップ (&lt; skin + -ship , "physical contact"), although coined by compounding English roots, are nonsensical in most non-Japanese contexts; exceptions exist in nearby languages such as Korean however, which often use words such as skinship and rimokon (remote control) in the same way as in Japanese. 
 The popularity of many Japanese cultural exports has made some native Japanese words familiar in English, including futon , haiku , judo , kamikaze , karaoke , karate , ninja , origami , rickshaw (from 人力車 jinrikisha ), samurai , sayonara , sudoku , sumo , sushi , tsunami , tycoon . See list of English words of Japanese origin for more. 
 Writing system  
 Main articles: Japanese writing system and Japanese braille 
 
 
  
 
 
 Calligraphy 
 
 
 
 
 Arabic 
 Chinese 
 Georgian 
 Indian 
 Japanese 
 Korean 
 Kufic 
 Mongolian 
 Nepalese 
 Persian 
 Sini 
 Tibetan 
 Western 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 t 
 e 
 
 
 
 
 
 Literacy was introduced to Japan in the form of the Chinese writing system , by way of Baekje before the 5th century.  ) and spread the use of Chinese characters from the 7th century to the 8th century. 
 
 
 
  
Table of Kana: Hiragana top, Katakana in the center and Romanized equivalents at the bottom 
 
 
 At first, the Japanese wrote in Classical Chinese , with Japanese names represented by characters used for their meanings and not their sounds. Later, during the 7th century AD, the Chinese-sounding phoneme principle was used to write pure Japanese poetry and prose, but some Japanese words were still written with characters for their meaning and not the original Chinese sound. This is when the history of Japanese as a written language begins in its own right. By this time, the Japanese language was already very distinct from the Ryukyuan languages .  
 An example of this mixed style is the Kojiki , which was written in AD 712. They then started to use Chinese characters to write Japanese in a style known as man'yōgana , a syllabic script which used Chinese characters for their sounds in order to transcribe the words of Japanese speech syllable by syllable. 
 Over time, a writing system evolved. Chinese characters ( kanji ) were used to write either words borrowed from Chinese, or Japanese words with the same or similar meanings. Chinese characters were also used to write grammatical elements, were simplified, and eventually became two syllabic scripts: hiragana and katakana which were developed based on Manyogana from Baekje.  
 Modern Japanese is written in a mixture of three main systems: kanji , characters of Chinese origin used to represent both Chinese loanwords into Japanese and a number of native Japanese morphemes ; and two syllabaries : hiragana and katakana . The Latin script is also sometimes used, mostly in acronyms and other abbreviations. Arabic numerals are much more common than the kanji when used in counting, but kanji numerals are still used in compounds, such as 統一 tōitsu ("unification"). 
 Hiragana are used for words without kanji representation, for words no longer written in kanji, and also following kanji to show conjugational endings. Because of the way verbs (and adjectives) in Japanese are conjugated , kanji alone cannot fully convey Japanese tense and mood, as kanji cannot be subject to variation when written without losing its meaning. For this reason, hiragana are suffixed to the ends of kanji to show verb and adjective conjugations. Hiragana used in this way are called okurigana . Hiragana can also be written in a superscript called furigana above or beside a kanji to show the proper reading. This is done to facilitate learning, as well as to clarify particularly old or obscure (or sometimes invented) readings. 
 Katakana , like hiragana, are a syllabary; katakana are primarily used to write foreign words, plant and animal names, and for emphasis. For example "Australia" has been adapted as Ōsutoraria ( オーストラリア ), and "supermarket" has been adapted and shortened into sūpā ( スーパー ). 
 Historically, attempts to limit the number of kanji in use commenced in the mid-19th century, but did not become a matter of government intervention until after Japan's defeat in the Second World War. During the period of post-war occupation (and influenced by the views of some U.S. officials), various schemes including the complete abolition of kanji and exclusive use of rōmaji were considered. The jōyō kanji ("common use kanji", originally called tōyō kanji ) scheme arose as a compromise solution. 
 Japanese students begin to learn kanji from their first year at elementary school. A guideline created by the Japanese Ministry of Education, the list of kyōiku kanji ("education kanji", a subset of jōyō kanji ), specifies the 1,006 simple characters a child is to learn by the end of sixth grade. Children continue to study another 1,130 characters in junior high school, covering in total 2,136 jōyō kanji . The official list of jōyō kanji was revised several times, but the total number of officially sanctioned characters remained largely unchanged. 
 As for kanji for personal names, the circumstances are somewhat complicated. Jōyō kanji and jinmeiyō kanji (an appendix of additional characters for names) are approved for registering personal names. Names containing unapproved characters are denied registration. However, as with the list of jōyō kanji , criteria for inclusion were often arbitrary and led to many common and popular characters being disapproved for use. Under popular pressure and following a court decision holding the exclusion of common characters unlawful, the list of jinmeiyō kanji was substantially extended from 92 in 1951 (the year it was first decreed) to 983 in 2004. Furthermore, families whose names are not on these lists were permitted to continue using the older forms. 
 Study by non-native speakers  
 See also category: Japanese-language education by country 
 Many major universities throughout the world provide Japanese language courses, and a number of secondary and even primary schools worldwide offer courses in the language. This is much changed from before World War II ; in 1940, only 65 Americans not of Japanese descent were able to read, write and understand the language.  
 For native English speakers, the Japanese language is one of the hardest languages to learn, largely due to its writing system.  
 International interest in the Japanese language dates from the 19th century but has become more prevalent following Japan's economic bubble of the 1980s and the global popularity of Japanese popular culture (such as anime and video games ) since the 1990s. Near of 4 million people studied the language worldwide in 2012: more than 1 million Chinese, 872,000 Indonesian, 840,000 South Koreans studied Japanese in lower and higher educational institutions. In the last three years the number of students studying Japanese in China increased by 26.5 percent/three years, and by 21.8 percent Indonesia , but dropped 12.8 percent in South Korea .  
 In Japan, more than 90,000 foreign students studied at Japanese universities and Japanese language schools , including 77,000 Chinese and 15,000 South Koreans in 2003. In addition, local governments and some NPO groups provide free Japanese language classes for foreign residents, including Japanese Brazilians and foreigners married to Japanese nationals. In the United Kingdom, study of the Japanese language is supported by the British Association for Japanese Studies . In Ireland , Japanese is offered as a language in the Leaving Certificate in some schools.  
 The Japanese government provides standardized tests to measure spoken and written comprehension of Japanese for second language learners; the most prominent is the Japanese Language Proficiency Test (JLPT), which features five levels of exams (changed from four levels in 2010), ranging from elementary (N5) to advanced (N1). The JLPT is only offered twice a year. The Japanese External Trade Organization JETRO organizes the Business Japanese Proficiency Test which tests the learner's ability to understand Japanese in a business setting. The Japan Kanji Aptitude Testing Foundation, which took over the BJT from JETRO in 2009, announced in August 2010 that the test would be discontinued in 2011 due to financial pressures on the Foundation. However, it has since issued a statement to the effect that the test will continue to be available as a result of support from the Japanese government.  
 When learning Japanese in a college setting, students are usually first taught how to pronounce romaji . From that point, they are taught the two main syllabaries, with kanji usually being introduced in the second semester. Focus is usually first on polite (distal) speech, which is what students would be expected to use when interacting with native speakers. Casual speech and formal speech usually follow polite speech, as well as the usage of honorifics. 
 See also  
 
 
 
  
 Japan portal 
 
 
  
 Language portal 
 
 
 
 
 Aizuchi 
 Culture of Japan 
 Henohenomoheji 
 Japanese dictionaries 
 Japanese language and computers 
 Japanese literature 
 Japanese name 
 Japanese orthography issues 
 Japanese Sign Language family 
 Japanese words and words derived from Japanese in other languages at Wiktionary , Wikipedia's sibling project 
 Rendaku 
 Romanization of Japanese 
 
 Hepburn romanization 
 
 
 Shogakukan Progressive Japanese–English Dictionary (book) 
 Yojijukugo 
 
 Notes  
 
 
 ^  Book of Song 順帝昇明二年，倭王武遣使上表曰：封國偏遠，作藩于外，自昔祖禰，躬擐甲冑，跋渉山川，不遑寧處。東征毛人五十國，西服衆夷六十六國，渡平海北九十五國，王道融泰，廓土遐畿，累葉朝宗，不愆于歳。臣雖下愚，忝胤先緒，驅率所統，歸崇天極，道逕百濟，裝治船舫，而句驪無道，圖欲見吞，掠抄邊隸，虔劉不已，毎致稽滯，以失良風。雖曰進路，或通或不。臣亡考濟實忿寇讎，壅塞天路，控弦百萬，義聲感激，方欲大舉，奄喪父兄，使垂成之功，不獲一簣。居在諒闇，不動兵甲，是以偃息未捷。至今欲練甲治兵，申父兄之志，義士虎賁，文武效功，白刃交前，亦所不顧。若以帝德覆載，摧此強敵，克靖方難，無替前功。竊自假開府儀同三司，其餘咸各假授，以勸忠節。詔除武使持節督倭、新羅、任那、加羅、秦韓六國諸軍事、安東大將軍、倭國王。至齊建元中，及梁武帝時，并來朝貢。 
 ^  Nihon shoki Chapter 30:持統五年 九月己巳朔壬申。賜音博士大唐続守言。薩弘恪。書博士百済末士善信、銀人二十両。 
 ^  Nihon shoki Chapter 30:持統六年 十二月辛酉朔甲戌。賜音博士続守言。薩弘恪水田人四町 
 ^  Shoku Nihongi 宝亀九年 十二月庚寅。玄蕃頭従五位上袁晋卿賜姓清村宿禰。晋卿唐人也。天平七年随我朝使帰朝。時年十八九。学得文選爾雅音。為大学音博士。於後。歴大学頭安房守。 
 
 
 References  
 
 
 ^  "Världens 100 största språk 2010"  . Nationalencyklopedin . 2010 . Retrieved 12 February 2014 . &#160; (Swedish) 
 ^  Wade, Nicholas (May 4, 2011). "Finding on Dialects Casts New Light on the Origins of the Japanese People" . The New York Times . Retrieved May 7, 2011 . &#160; 
 ^  Shinkichi Hashimoto (February 3, 1918)「国語仮名遣研究史上の一発見―石塚龍麿の仮名遣奥山路について」『帝国文学』26–11(1949『文字及び仮名遣の研究(橋本進吉博士著作集 第3冊)』(岩波書店)。 
 ^  大野 晋 (1953)『上代仮名遣の研究』(岩波書店)p.126 
 ^  大野 晋 (1982)『仮名遣いと上代語』(岩波書店) p.65 
 ^  有坂 秀世 (1931)「国語にあらはれる一種の母音交替について」『音声の研究』第4輯(1957年の『国語音韻史の研究 増補新版』(三省堂) 
 ^  Miura, Akira, English in Japanese , Weatherhill, 1998. 
 ^  Japanese is listed as one of the official languages of Angaur state, Palau ( Ethnologe , CIA World Factbook ). However, very few Japanese speakers were recorded in the 2005 census . 
 ^  "IBGE traça perfil dos imigrantes – Imigração – Made in Japan" . Madeinjapan.uol.com.br. 2008-06-21 . Retrieved 2012-11-20 . &#160; 
 ^  "American FactFinder" . Factfinder.census.gov . Retrieved 2013-02-01 . &#160; 
 ^  "Japanese – Source Census 2000, Summary File 3, STP 258" . Mla.org . Retrieved 2012-11-20 . &#160; 
 ^  "Ethnocultural Portrait of Canada – Data table" . 2.statcan.ca. 2010-06-10 . Retrieved 2012-11-20 . &#160; 
 ^   
 ^   
 ^   
 ^  "法制執務コラム集「法律と国語・日本語」" (in Japanese). Legislative Bureau of the House of Councillors . Retrieved 9 November 2012 . &#160; 
 ^  a   b   c  Robbeets 2005 , p.&#160;20. 
 ^  Kindaichi &amp; Hirano 1978 , pp.&#160;30–31. 
 ^  Robbeets 2005 , p.&#160;25. 
 ^  a   b  Robbeets 2005 , p.&#160;25; Vovin 2010 , p.&#160;3. 
 ^  a   b  Vovin 2010 , p.&#160;3. 
 ^  Vovin 2010 , p.&#160;6. 
 ^  Robbeets 2005 , p.&#160;18. 
 ^  Robbeets 2005 , p.&#160;19. 
 ^  Robbeets 2005 , p.&#160;22. 
 ^  Robbeets 2005 , pp.&#160;21, 23. 
 ^  Robbeets 2005 , pp.&#160;26–27. 
 ^  新選国語辞典, 金田一京助, 小学館, 2001, ISBN 4-09-501407-5 
 ^  " Buddhist Art of Korea &amp; Japan ," Asia Society Museum; " Kanji ," JapanGuide.com; " Pottery ," MSN Encarta; " History of Japan ," JapanVisitor.com. Archived 2009-10-31. 
 ^  Heinrich, Patrick. "What leaves a mark should no longer stain: Progressive erasure and reversing language shift activities in the Ryukyu Islands," First International Small Island Cultures Conference at Kagoshima University , Centre for the Pacific Islands, February 7–10, 2005; citing Shiro Hattori . (1954) Gengo nendaigaku sunawachi goi tokeigaku no hoho ni tsuite ("Concerning the Method of Glottochronology and Lexicostatistics"), Gengo kenkyu ( Journal of the Linguistic Society of Japan ), Vols. 26/27. 
 ^  John R. Bentley. " " The origin of Manyogana", Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies (2001), 64: 59–73" . Cambridge University Press . Retrieved 2012-11-20 . &#160; 
 ^  Shunpei Mizuno, ed. (2002). 韓国人の日本偽史―日本人はビックリ! (in Japanese). Shogakukan. ISBN &#160; 4-09-402716-5 . &#160; 
 ^  Shunpei Mizuno, ed. (2007). 韓vs日「偽史ワールド」 (in Japanese). Shogakukan. ISBN &#160; 4-09-387703-3 . &#160; 
 ^  Beate Sirota Gordon commencement address at Mills College , May 14, 2011. "Sotomayor, Denzel Washington, GE CEO Speak to Graduates," C-SPAN (US). May 30, 2011; retrieved 2011-05-30 
 ^  "RI ranks No. 2 in learning Japanese language" . July 15, 2013. &#160; 
 ^  "BJT Business Japanese Proficiency Test" . Kanken.or.jp . Retrieved 2012-11-20 . &#160; 
 ^  "Relaunching of the Business Japanese Proficiency Test in FY 2012 and Temporary Measures in FY 2011" . Kanken.or.jp. November 25, 20120 . Retrieved 2012-11-20 . &#160; Check date values in: |date= ( help ) 
 
 
 Works cited  
 
 
 Bloch, Bernard (1946). Studies in colloquial Japanese I: Inflection. Journal of the American Oriental Society , 66 , pp.&#160;97–130. 
 Bloch, Bernard (1946). Studies in colloquial Japanese II: Syntax. Language , 22 , pp.&#160;200–248. 
 Chafe, William L. (1976). Giveness, contrastiveness, definiteness, subjects, topics, and point of view. In C. Li (Ed.), Subject and topic (pp.&#160;25–56). New York: Academic Press. ISBN 0-12-447350-4 . 
 Dalby, Andrew. (2004). "Japanese," in Dictionary of Languages: the Definitive Reference to More than 400 Languages. New York: Columbia University Press. 10- ISBN 0231115687 /13- ISBN 9780231115681 ; 10- ISBN 0231115695 /13- ISBN 9780231115698 ; OCLC 474656178 
 Frellesvig, Bjarke (2010). A history of the Japanese language . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-65320-6 . 
 Kindaichi, Haruhiko; Hirano, Umeyo (1978). The Japanese Language . Tuttle Publishing . ISBN &#160; 978-0-8048-1579-6 . &#160; 
 
 
 Kuno, Susumu (1973). The structure of the Japanese language . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-11049-0 . 
 Kuno, Susumu. (1976). "Subject, theme, and the speaker's empathy: A re-examination of relativization phenomena," in Charles N. Li (Ed.), Subject and topic (pp.&#160;417–444). New York: Academic Press. ISBN 0-12-447350-4 . 
 Martin, Samuel E. (1975). A reference grammar of Japanese . New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-01813-4 . 
 McClain, Yoko Matsuoka. (1981). Handbook of modern Japanese grammar: 口語日本文法便覧 . Tokyo: Hokuseido Press. ISBN 4-590-00570-0 ; ISBN 0-89346-149-0 . 
 Miller, Roy (1967). The Japanese language . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
 Miller, Roy (1980). Origins of the Japanese language: Lectures in Japan during the academic year, 1977–78 . Seattle: University of Washington Press. ISBN 0-295-95766-2 . 
 Mizutani, Osamu; &amp; Mizutani, Nobuko (1987). How to be polite in Japanese: 日本語の敬語 . Tokyo: The Japan Times . ISBN 4-7890-0338-8 . 
 Robbeets, Martine Irma (2005). Is Japanese Related to Korean, Tungusic, Mongolic and Turkic? . Otto Harrassowitz Verlag. ISBN &#160; 978-3-447-05247-4 . &#160; 
 Shibatani, Masayoshi (1990). Japanese. In B. Comrie (Ed.), The major languages of east and south-east Asia . London: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-04739-0 . 
 Shibatani, Masayoshi (1990). The languages of Japan . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-36070-6 (hbk); ISBN 0-521-36918-5 (pbk). 
 Shibamoto, Janet S. (1985). Japanese women's language . New York: Academic Press. ISBN 0-12-640030-X . Graduate Level 
 Tsujimura, Natsuko (1996). An introduction to Japanese linguistics . Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Publishers. ISBN 0-631-19855-5 (hbk); ISBN 0-631-19856-3 (pbk). Upper Level Textbooks 
 Tsujimura, Natsuko (Ed.) (1999). The handbook of Japanese linguistics . Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers. ISBN 0-631-20504-7 . Readings/Anthologies 
 Vovin, Alexander (2010). Korea-Japonica: A Re-Evaluation of a Common Genetic Origin . University of Hawaii Press . ISBN &#160; 978-0-8248-3278-0 . &#160; 
 
 
 Further reading  
 
 Rudolf Lange (1907). Christopher Noss, ed. A text-book of colloquial Japanese (revised English ed.). TOKYO: Methodist publishing house. p.&#160;588 . Retrieved 1 March 2012 . &#160; (All rights reserved, copyright 1903 by Christopher Noss; reprinted April 1907 by the Methodist Publishing House, Tokyo, Japan) (Original from the New York Public Library) (Digitized Apr 2, 2008) 
 Rudolf Lange (1907). Christopher Noss, ed. A text-book of colloquial Japanese (revised English ed.). TOKYO: Methodist publishing house. p.&#160;588 . Retrieved 1 March 2012 . &#160; (All rights reserved; copyright 1903 by Christopher Noss; reprinted April 1907 by the Methodist Publishing House, Tokyo, Japan) (Original from Harvard University) (Digitized Oct 10, 2008) 
 A Text-book of Colloquial Japanese (English ed.). The Kaneko Press, North Japan College, Sendai: Methodist Publishing House. 1903. p.&#160;573 . Retrieved 1 March 2012 . &#160; Cite uses deprecated parameters ( help ); |coauthors= requires |author= ( help ) (Tokyo Methodist Publishing House 1903) 
 Rudolf Lange (1903). Christopher Noss, ed. A text-book of colloquial Japanese: based on the Lehrbuch der japanischen umgangssprache by Dr. Rudolf Lange (revised English ed.). TOKYO: Methodist publishing house. p.&#160;588 . Retrieved 1 March 2012 . &#160; (All rights reserved; copyright 1903 by Christopher Noss; reprinted April 1907 by the Methodist Publishing House, Tokyo, Japan) (Original from the University of California) (Digitized Oct 10, 2007) 
 Shibatani, Masayoshi. (1990). The languages of Japan . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 
 "Japanese Language" . MIT . Retrieved 2009-05-13 . &#160; 
 
 External links  
 
 
 
 Wikibooks has more on the topic of: Japanese language 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikiversity has learning materials about Topic:Japanese 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Japanese language . 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikivoyage has a phrasebook for Japanese . 
 
 
 
 
 
 Look up japanese language in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Japanese edition of Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 National Institute for Japanese Language and Linguistics 
 Japanese Language Student's Handbook 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 t 
 e 
 
 
 Japanese language 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stages 
 
 
 
 Old Japanese 
 Early Middle Japanese 
 Late Middle Japanese 
 Early Modern Japanese 
 Modern Japanese 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dialects 
 
 
 
 Hokkaidō 
 Tōhoku 
 
 Tsugaru 
 Kesen 
 Yamagata 
 
 
 Kantō 
 
 Ibaraki 
 Tokyo 
 
 
 Tōkai–Tōsan 
 
 Nagaoka 
 Nagoya 
 Mino 
 Hida 
 
 
 Hokuriku 
 Kansai 
 Chūgoku 
 Umpaku 
 Shikoku 
 
 Iyo 
 Tosa 
 Sanuki 
 
 
 Hōnichi 
 
 Ōita 
 
 
 Hichiku 
 
 Hakata 
 Saga 
 Tsushima 
 
 
 Satsugū 
 Hachijō 
 Okinawan Japanese 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Japonic languages 
 
 
 
 Okinawan language 
 Kunigami language 
 Miyako language 
 Amami language 
 Yaeyama language 
 Yonaguni language 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Writing system 
 
 
 
 
 
 Logograms 
 
 
 
 
 Kanji 
 Kanbun 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kana 
 
 
 
 
 Hiragana 
 Katakana 
 Furigana 
 Okurigana 
 Gojūon 
 Man'yōgana 
 Hentaigana 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Orthography 
 
 
 
 
 Braille 
 Punctuation 
 Japanese orthographic issues 
 Kanazukai 
 Historical kana orthography 
 Jōdai Tokushu Kanazukai 
 Modern kana usage 
 Yotsugana 
 Transcription into Japanese 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grammar and 
vocabulary 
 
 
 
 Japanese grammar 
 Verb and adjective conjugations 
 Consonant and vowel verbs 
 Irregular verbs 
 Pronouns 
 Adjectives 
 Possessives 
 Particles 
 Topic marker 
 Counter words 
 Numerals 
 Native words (yamato kotoba) 
 Sino-Japanese vocabulary 
 Loan words (gairaigo) 
 Wasei-eigo 
 Engrish 
 Honorific speech 
 Honorifics 
 Court lady language (nyōbō kotoba) 
 Gender differences 
 Dictionaries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Phonology 
 
 
 
 Pitch accent 
 Sound symbolism 
 Rendaku 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Romanization 
 
 
 
 Hepburn 
 Nihon-shiki 
 Kunrei 
 JSL 
 Wāpuro rōmaji 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cyrillization 
 
 
 
 Cyrillization of Japanese 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    



 								 
				Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Japanese_language&amp;oldid=596502517 "				 
												 Categories : Languages with ISO 639-2 code Languages with ISO 639-1 code Calligraphy Japanese language Agglutinative languages Languages of Japan Languages of Palau Subject–object–verb languages  Hidden categories: Articles with Swedish-language external links CS1 errors: dates Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August 2012 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2011 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2009 Articles with hAudio microformats Articles lacking in-text citations from November 2013 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with unsourced statements from May 2010 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2013 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2013 Pages containing cite templates with deprecated parameters CS1 errors: coauthors without author Commons category template with no category set Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata  												 
							 
		 
		 
			 Navigation menu 
			 
				 
	 Personal tools 
	 
 Create account Log in 	 
 
				 
					 
	 Namespaces 
	 
					 Article 
					 Talk 
			 
 
 
	 
		 
	 Variants 
	 
		 
					 
	 
 
				 
				 
					 
	 Views 
	 
					 Read 
					 Edit 
					 View history 
			 
 
 
	 Actions 
	 
		 
					 
	 
 
 
	 Search 
	 
					 
					 		 
	 
 
				 
			 
			 
					 
				 
	 Navigation 
	 
		 
			 Main page 
			 Contents 
			 Featured content 
			 Current events 
			 Random article 
			 Donate to Wikipedia 
			 Wikimedia Shop 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Interaction 
	 
		 
			 Help 
			 About Wikipedia 
			 Community portal 
			 Recent changes 
			 Contact page 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Tools 
	 
		 
			 What links here 
			 Related changes 
			 Upload file 
			 Special pages 
			 Permanent link 
			 Page information 
			 Data item 
 Cite this page 		 
	 
 
 
	 Print/export 
	 
		 
			 Create a book 
			 Download as PDF 
			 Printable version 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Languages 
	 
		 
			 Acèh 
			 Адыгэбзэ 
			 Afrikaans 
			 Alemannisch 
			 አማርኛ 
			 Ænglisc 
			 Аҧсшәа 
			 العربية 
			 Aragonés 
			 ܐܪܡܝܐ 
			 Asturianu 
			 Avañe'ẽ 
			 Azərbaycanca 
			 বাংলা 
			 Bahasa Banjar 
			 Bân-lâm-gú 
			 Basa Banyumasan 
			 Башҡортса 
			 Беларуская 
			 Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ 
			 Bikol Central 
			 Български 
			 Boarisch 
			 བོད་ཡིག 
			 Bosanski 
			 Brezhoneg 
			 Català 
			 Чӑвашла 
			 Cebuano 
			 Čeština 
			 Cymraeg 
			 Dansk 
			 Deutsch 
			 ދިވެހިބަސް 
			 Dolnoserbski 
			 Eesti 
			 Ελληνικά 
			 Español 
			 Esperanto 
			 Estremeñu 
			 Euskara 
			 فارسی 
			 Fiji Hindi 
			 Føroyskt 
			 Français 
			 Frysk 
			 Gaeilge 
			 Gaelg 
			 Gagauz 
			 Gàidhlig 
			 Galego 
			 贛語 
			 客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî 
			 Хальмг 
			 한국어 
			 Հայերեն 
			 हिन्दी 
			 Hornjoserbsce 
			 Hrvatski 
			 Ido 
			 Ilokano 
			 Bahasa Indonesia 
			 Interlingua 
			 IsiZulu 
			 Íslenska 
			 Italiano 
			 עברית 
			 Basa Jawa 
			 Kalaallisut 
			 ಕನ್ನಡ 
			 Kapampangan 
			 ქართული 
			 Қазақша 
			 Kernowek 
			 Kinyarwanda 
			 Kiswahili 
			 Коми 
			 Kurdî 
			 Кыргызча 
			 Ladino 
			 Лезги 
			 ລາວ 
			 Latina 
			 Latviešu 
			 Lëtzebuergesch 
			 Lietuvių 
			 Limburgs 
			 Lingála 
			 Lojban 
			 Lumbaart 
			 Magyar 
			 Македонски 
			 Malagasy 
			 മലയാളം 
			 Māori 
			 मराठी 
			 مصرى 
			 مازِرونی 
			 Bahasa Melayu 
			 Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ 
			 Мокшень 
			 Монгол 
			 မြန်မာဘာသာ 
			 Nāhuatl 
			 Nederlands 
			 Nedersaksies 
			 नेपाल भाषा 
			 日本語 
			 Нохчийн 
			 Nordfriisk 
			 Norsk bokmål 
			 Norsk nynorsk 
			 Occitan 
			 Олык марий 
			 ଓଡ଼ିଆ 
			 Oʻzbekcha 
			 ਪੰਜਾਬੀ 
			 پنجابی 
			 ភាសាខ្មែរ 
			 Picard 
			 Piemontèis 
			 Tok Pisin 
			 Polski 
			 Português 
			 Reo Mā`ohi 
			 Română 
			 Runa Simi 
			 Русиньскый 
			 Русский 
			 Саха тыла 
			 Sámegiella 
			 संस्कृतम् 
			 Sardu 
			 Scots 
			 Shqip 
			 Sicilianu 
			 Simple English 
			 Slovenčina 
			 Slovenščina 
			 Словѣньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟ 
			 Ślůnski 
			 کوردی 
			 Српски / srpski 
			 Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски 
			 Basa Sunda 
			 Suomi 
			 Svenska 
			 Tagalog 
			 தமிழ் 
			 Taqbaylit 
			 Tarandíne 
			 Татарча/tatarça 
			 ไทย 
			 Тоҷикӣ 
			 Türkçe 
			 Türkmençe 
			 Українська 
			 اردو 
			 ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche 
			 Vahcuengh 
			 Tiếng Việt 
			 Võro 
			 Walon 
			 文言 
			 Winaray 
			 吴语 
			 ייִדיש 
			 Yorùbá 
			 粵語 
			 Žemaitėška 
			 中文 
			 
			 Edit links 
		 
	 
 
			 
		 
		 
							 
											 This page was last modified on 21 February 2014 at 15:41. 
											 Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. 
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
									 
							 
											 Privacy policy 
											 About Wikipedia 
											 Disclaimers 
											 Contact Wikipedia 
											 Developers 
											 Mobile view