Klingon language - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 





 
 
		 
		 
		 
			 
			 
						 
						 Klingon language 
			 
								 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
								 
												 
					Jump to:					 navigation , 					 search 
				 
				 
 
 Klingon 
 
 
 tlhIngan Hol 
 
 
 Pronunciation 
 /ˈt͡ɬɪ.ŋɑn xol/ 
 
 
 Created&#160;by 
 Marc Okrand , James Doohan 
 
 
 Setting and usage 
 Star Trek films and television series ( TNG , DS9 , Voyager , Enterprise ) and the opera 'u' . 
 
 
 Users 
 Around 12 fluent speakers &#160;(1996)  
 
 
 Purpose 
 
 constructed languages 
 
 artistic languages 
 
 fictional languages 
 
 Klingon 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Writing system 
 
 Latin alphabet , Klingon alphabets ( pIqaD ) 
 
 
 Sources 
 constructed languages 
&#160; a priori languages 
 
 
 Official status 
 
 
 Regulated&#160;by 
 Marc Okrand 
 
 
 Language codes 
 
 
 ISO 639-2 
 tlh 
 
 
 ISO 639-3 
 tlh 
 
 
 This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. 
 
 
  
 The Klingon language ( tlhIngan Hol , pronounced /ˈt͡ɬɪ.ŋɑn xol/ ) is the constructed language spoken by the fictional Klingons in the Star Trek universe. 
 Described in the 1984 book The Klingon Dictionary by Marc Okrand and deliberately designed to sound "alien", it has a number of typologically uncommon features. The language's basic sound, along with a few words, was first devised by actor James Doohan (" Scotty ") for Star Trek: The Motion Picture . That film marked the first time the language had been heard on screen. In all previous appearances, Klingons spoke in English. Klingon was subsequently developed by Okrand into a full-fledged language. 
 Klingon is sometimes referred to as Klingonese (most notably in the Star Trek: The Original Series episode " The Trouble with Tribbles ", where it was actually pronounced by a Klingon character as "Klingonee" /klɪŋɡoni/ ) but, among the Klingon-speaking community, this is often understood to refer to another Klingon language called Klingonaase that was introduced in John M. Ford 's 1984 Star Trek novel The Final Reflection , and appears in other Star Trek novels by Ford. A shorthand version of Klingonaase, and later with the same term adopted by tlhIngan Hol itself, is called "battle language", or "Clipped Klingon".  
 The Klingon Christmas Carol play is the first production that is primarily in Klingon (only the narrator speaks English). The opera 'u' is entirely in Klingon. 
 A small number of people are capable of conversing in Klingon. Its vocabulary, heavily centered on Star Trek-Klingon concepts such as spacecraft or warfare , can sometimes make it cumbersome for everyday use.  
 
 
 
 Contents 
 
 
 1 External history 
 2 Language 
 3 Speakers 
 4 Appearance and use 
 
 4.1 Star Trek feature films 
 4.2 Other movies 
 
 4.2.1 Correct Klingon 
 4.2.2 Other references to Klingon language 
 
 
 4.3 Television shows 
 4.4 Other media 
 
 
 5 Canon 
 
 5.1 Internal history 
 5.2 Sources 
 
 
 6 Phonology 
 
 6.1 Consonants 
 6.2 Vowels 
 6.3 Syllable structure 
 6.4 Stress 
 
 
 7 Grammar 
 8 Writing systems 
 9 Vocabulary 
 10 Example sentences 
 11 See also 
 12 Notes 
 13 References 
 14 External links 
 
 
 
 External history  
 Though mentioned in the original Star Trek series episode " The Trouble With Tribbles ", the Klingon language first appeared on-screen in Star Trek: The Motion Picture (1979). According to the actor who spoke the lines, Mark Lenard , James Doohan recorded the lines he had written on a tape, and Lenard transcribed the recorded lines in a way he found useful in learning them. How closely Lenard's delivery of the lines matches Doohan's intentions is not known.  
 For Star Trek III: The Search for Spock (1984) director Leonard Nimoy and writer-producer Harve Bennett wanted the Klingons to speak a proper language instead of made-up gibberish and so commissioned a full language based on the phrases Doohan had come up from Marc Okrand, who had earlier devised four lines of Vulcan dialogue for Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan .  Okrand enlarged the lexicon and developed grammar based on the original dozen words Doohan had created. The language appeared intermittently in later films featuring the original cast—for example, in Star Trek V: The Final Frontier (1989) and in Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country (1991), where translation difficulties served as a plot device . 
 Two "non-canon" dialects of Klingon are hinted at in the novelization of Star Trek III: The Search for Spock , as Saavik speaks in Klingon, to the only Klingon officer aboard Capt. Kruge's starship after his death, as the survivors of the Enterprise 's self-destruction transport up from the crumbling Genesis Planet to the Klingon ship. The surviving officer, Maltz, states that he speaks the Rumaiy dialect, while Saavik is speaking to him in the Kumburan dialect of Klingon, per Maltz' spoken reply to her.  
 With the advent of the series Star Trek: The Next Generation (1987)—in which one of the main characters, Worf , was a Klingon—and successors, the language and various cultural aspects for the fictional species were expanded. In the Star Trek: The Next Generation episode " A Matter of Honor ", several members of a Klingon ship's crew speak a language that is not translated for the benefit of the viewer (even Commander Riker, enjoying the benefits of a universal translator , is unable to understand) until one Klingon orders the others to "speak their  language". A small number of non-Klingon characters were later depicted in Star Trek as having learned to speak Klingon, notably Jean-Luc Picard and Jadzia Dax . 
 Worf would later reappear among the regular characters in Star Trek: Deep Space Nine (1993) and B'Elanna Torres , a Klingon-human hybrid , would become a main character on Star Trek: Voyager (1995). The use of untranslated Klingon words interspersed with conversation translated into English was commonplace in later seasons of Star Trek: Deep Space Nine , when Klingons became a more important part of the series' overall story-arcs.  
 The pilot episode of the prequel series Star Trek: Enterprise , " Broken Bow " (2001) describes the Klingon language as having "eighty polyguttural dialects constructed on an adaptive syntax ". However, Klingon as described on television is often not entirely congruous with the Klingon developed by Okrand. 
 Language  
 
 
 
  
 The Klingon Hamlet 
 
 
 Hobbyists around the world have studied the Klingon language. Four Klingon translations of works of world literature have been published:  ghIlghameS  ( Gilgamesh ), Hamlet ( Hamlet ), paghmo' tIn mIS ( Much Ado About Nothing ) and pIn'a' qan paQDI'norgh ( Tao Te Ching ). The Shakespearian choices were inspired by a remark from High Chancellor Gorkon in Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country , who said, "You have not experienced Shakespeare until you have read him in the original Klingon." In the bonus material on the DVD, screenwriter Nicholas Meyer and actor William Shatner both explain that this was an allusion to the German myth that Shakespeare was in fact German  . 
 The Klingon Language Institute exists to promote the language.  
 CBS Television Studios owns a copyright of the official dictionary and other canonical descriptions of the language. While constructed languages ("conlangs") are viewed as creations with copyright protection,  
 Okrand had studied some Native American and Southeast Asian languages ,  
 
 
 
  
Previous Wikipedia logo with Klingon character at upper right 
 
 
 The 2003–2010 version of the puzzle globe logo of Wikipedia , representing its multilingualism, contained a Klingon character. The updated logo removed the character and substituted one from the Ge'ez script . 
 Speakers  
 A small number of people are capable of conversing in Klingon. Arika Okrent guessed in her book "In the Land of Invented Languages" that there might be 20–30 fluent speakers.  
 One Klingon speaker, d'Armond Speers , raised his son Alec to speak Klingon as a first language, whilst the boy's mother communicated with him in English.  
 In May 2009, Simon &amp; Schuster , in collaboration with Ultralingua Inc., a developer of electronic dictionary applications, announced the release of a suite of electronic Klingon language software for most computer platforms including a dictionary, a phrasebook, and an audio learning tool.  
 In September 2011, Eurotalk released the "Learn Klingon" course in its Talk Now! series. The language is displayed in both Latin and pIqaD fonts making this the first language course written in pIqaD and approved by CBS and Marc Okrand . It was translated by Jonathan Brown and Okrand and uses the Hol-pIqaD TrueType font.  
 Appearance and use  
 The Klingon language was first developed only for the purpose of being used in Star Trek. A daily conversation or a perfect translation of literature are difficult because of the small vocabulary of only 3000 words. Fans enjoy using the language on conventions and for role-playing to give their character a more realistic appearance (also see cosplay ). There are Klingon language meetings  and even linguists or students are interested in researching this topic, even writing essays about the language or its users. In the media (music, literature and television) Klingon is also used frequently as a reference to Star Trek. 
 Star Trek feature films  
 Klingon is used in the following films: 
 
 Star Trek: The Motion Picture (1979) 
 
 
 A total of only eleven short phrases. These were created by James Doohan and made the basis for the language developed by Okrand. 
 
 
 Star Trek III: The Search for Spock (1984) 
 
 
 Some dialogues were first spoken in English and later recorded in Klingon. 
 
 
 Star Trek V: The Final Frontier (1989) 
 
 
 This film has the largest use of Klingon. 
 
 
 Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country (1991) 
 
 
 Lots of Klingon dialogues and also untranslated background screams. 
 
 
 Star Trek Generations (1994) 
 
 
 One single word was heard in the background of a Klingons' scene. 
 
 
 Star Trek (2009) 
 
 
 Two scenes with Klingon phrases had been cut from the film. These are shown in the special features part of the film's DVD. 
 
 
 Star Trek Into Darkness (2013) 
 
 
 There is a scene with Klingons where communications officer Uhura ( Zoë Saldaña ) talks to them in Klingon. 
 
 Other movies  
 Correct Klingon  
 
 Daddy Day Care (2003) 
 
 
 One of the children speaks a few phrases in Klingon. 
 
 
 Faintheart (2008) 
 
 
 One of the main characters loves Star Trek, so he speaks Klingon to his girlfriend during a romantic situation after she asked him to do so. 
 
 
 Paul (2011) 
 
 
 In this film about two nerds finding an alien lifeform, the main characters played by Simon Pegg and Nick Frost use Klingon as a form of secret communication.  
 
 Other references to Klingon language  
 
 Kill Bill (2003) 
 
 
 This film starts with an image of the "old Klingon proverb", displayed in English: "Revenge is a dish best served cold". Khan had referred to this phrase as an old Klingon proverb in Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan . 
 
 
 Garden State (2004) 
 
 
 There is a scene in which the character Tim, played by Jim Parsons , appears to speak Klingon, but no canon Klingon is used. 
 
 
 Fanboys (2009) 
 
 
 There is a scene where one of the main characters asks a Star Trek fan what the phrase "you're going to die a virgin" is in Klingon. 
 
 
 The Spy Next Door (2010) 
 
 
 A character says that Ian "found a Klingon dictionary" online. 
 
 Television shows  
 
 Star Trek: The Next Generation , Star Trek: Deep Space Nine 
 
 
 Several episodes use Klingon words, but none use Klingon as frequently as it is used in Star Trek films. 
 
 
 The Simpsons (February 2001) 
 
 
 In episode 11 of the twelfth season of The Simpsons , (entitled Worst Episode Ever ), Comic Book Guy is tossed out of Moe's bar. Lying in the gutter, he asks himself, "Is there a word in Klingon for 'loneliness'?" Flipping through his handy pocket dictionary, he looks skyward and exclaims, " Garr'dock! ". Likewise, he recites a Klingon oath of love in the episode My Big Fat Geek Wedding when about to marry Edna Krabappel at a Star Trek convention. None of these are proper Klingon, but the word LOVE is visible using Klingon letters. 
 
 
 Buffy the Vampire Slayer (May 2002) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Klingon "love poem" as seen in Buffy episode "Seeing Red" 
 
 
In Buffy the Vampire Slayer (season 6) , in the episode " Seeing Red " Klingon occurs in writing (in pIqaD ) at one point when the main characters rummage through the evil trio's lair in search for clues to their plans. Giles is mystified by the weird glyphs, but Xander immediately (and correctly) recognize this as Klingon. 
 
 
 Frasier (November 2002) 
 
 
 In "Star Mitzvah", a Season 10 episode of the sitcom , Frasier Crane gives a speech in Klingon at the ceremony for his son's Bar Mitzvah —having been fooled by a Jewish colleague he had let down into thinking it was Hebrew .  
 
 
 How I Met Your Mother (November 2005) 
 
 
 In the eighth episode of the first season (2005) " the Duel " Robin is forced to cancel a date with a geek. He answers with a Klingon insult ' 'Hab SoSlI' Quch ("Your mother has a smooth forehead") explaining that she was acting without honor. 
 
 
 NCIS (October 2006) 
 
 
 In " Witch Hunt ", an episode of the television crime drama, Timothy McGee , who understands Klingon, communicates with a suspect dressed as a Klingon at a Halloween party, until his superior, Leroy Jethro Gibbs , becomes impatient enough to force the suspect to speak in English. 
 
 
 Chuck (September 2007–January 2012) 
 
 
 Chuck Bartowski and Bryce Larkin communicate in Klingon when nobody else should understand and to verify their identity. 
 
 
 The Big Bang Theory (November 2008 et al.) 
 
 
 In The Big Bang Theory, there are frequent references to Klingon. In the second season episode " The Panty Piñata Polarization ", Sheldon , Leonard , Howard , and Raj are seen playing Klingon Boggle and speak several Klingon words during the game. In the third season episode " The Creepy Candy Coating Corollary ", Sheldon actually quotes the Klingon proverb referred to by Khan in Star Trek II: revenge being a dish best served cold . In the fifth season finale, " The Countdown Reflection ", Sheldon tries to wed Howard and Bernadette in Klingon. In the sixth episode of the seventh season, "The Romance Resonance", Howard W. sings a song for his wife Bernadette and includes a phrase in Klingon. 
 
 
 Shortland Street (January 2014) 
 
 
 In episode 5408 of this New Zealand soap opera , Harry sends an email in Klingon to Grace .  
 
 Other media  
 In 2010, a Chicago Theatre company presented a version of Charles Dickens ' A Christmas Carol in Klingon language and a Klingon setting.  This performance was reprised on February 27, 2011 featuring Stephen Fry as the Klingon Osric and was filmed by the BBC as part of a 5-part documentary on language entitled Fry's Planet Word . 
 A cryptic message left by a serial killer in Klingon is a plot point in the novel Watch Me by A.&#160;J. Holt.  
 Google Search  and Minecraft each have a Klingon language setting. 
 The January 12, 2003 strip of Something Positive showed a gamer speaking in Klingon.  
 The logo of wikipedia had a Klingon language character before its update in 2010. 
 In the title track to Kate Bush's 50 Words for Snow , the Klingon phrase peDtaH 'ej chIS qo' appears as number 42. She thanks Marc Okrand in the liner notes for providing the translation (for which the literal translation back into English is "It's snowing and the world is white.").  
 Microsoft's Bing translator can translate Klingon from and to other languages. 
 Canon  
 An important concept to spoken and written Klingon is canonicity . Only words and grammatical forms introduced by Marc Okrand are considered canonical Klingon by the KLI and most Klingonists. However, as the growing number of speakers employ different strategies to express themselves, it is often unclear as to what level of neologism is permissible.  
 Internal history  
 Within the fictional universe of Star Trek, Klingon is derived from the original language spoken by the messianic figure Kahless the Unforgettable, who united the Klingon home-world of Qo'noS under one empire more than 1500 years ago.  Many dialects exist, but the standardized dialect of prestige is almost invariably that of the sitting emperor. 
 Sources  
 The Klingon Language Institute regards the following works as canon Klingon; they serve as sources of Klingon vocabulary and grammar for all other works.  
 
 Books 
 The Klingon Dictionary (TKD) 
 The Klingon Way (TKW) 
 Klingon for the Galactic Traveler (KGT) 
 Sarek , a novel which includes some tlhIngan Hol 
 Federation Travel Guide , a pamphlet from Pocketbooks 
 paq'batlh : The Klingon Epic ( ISBN 978-90-817091-2-5 ), ed. Floris Schönfeld et al., trans. Marc Okrand . Includes the first full edition of the paq'batlh and no'Hol fragments. 
 
 
 Audio tapes 
 Conversational Klingon (CK) 
 Power Klingon (PK) 
 The Klingon Way (TKW) 
 
 
 Electronic resources 
 The Klingon Language Suite , language-learning tools from Ultralingua with Simon &amp; Schuster 
 Star Trek: Klingon , a CD-ROM game (KCD, also STK). The CD-ROM includes a Klingon learning module with speech recognition to train the player in Klingon pronunciation; this module was developed by Dragon Systems, Inc. (which is credited on the box and in the CD-ROM) in collaboration with Marc Okrand. 
 Talk Now! Learn Klingon a beginners language course for the Earth based Klingon by eurotalk and translated by Jonathan Brown (a.k.a. qe'San ) and Marc Okrand . (2011) 
 
 
 Other sources 
 certain articles in HolQeD (the journal of the KLI) (HQ) 
 certain Skybox Trading Cards (SKY) 
 a Star Trek Bird of Prey poster (BoP) 
 on-line and in-person text/speech by Marc Okrand (mostly newsgroup postings) 
 
 The letters in parentheses following each item (if any) indicate the acronym of each source - used when quoting canon. 
 Phonology  
 Klingon has been developed with a phonology that, while based on human natural languages , is intended to sound alien to human ears. When initially developed, Paramount Pictures (owners of the Star Trek franchise ) wanted the Klingon language to be guttural and harsh and Okrand wanted it to be unusual, so he selected sounds that combined in ways not generally found in other languages. The effect is mainly achieved by the use of a number of retroflex and uvular consonants in the language's inventory  . Klingon has twenty-one consonants and five vowels. Klingon is normally written in a variant of the Latin alphabet (see below ). In this orthography, upper and lower case letters are not interchangeable (uppercase letters mostly represent sounds different from those expected by English speakers). In the discussion below, standard Klingon orthography appears in 〈 angle brackets 〉 , and the phonemic transcription in the International Phonetic Alphabet is written between /slashes/ . 
 Consonants  
 The inventory of consonants in Klingon is spread over a number of places of articulation . In spite of this, the inventory has many gaps: Klingon has no velar plosives , and only one sibilant fricative . Deliberately, this arrangement is quite bizarre by the standards of human languages. The combination of an aspirated voiceless alveolar plosive /tʰ/ and a voiced retroflex plosive /ɖ/ is particularly unusual. 
 
 
 &#160; 
 Labial 
 Dental or alveolar 
 Retroflex 
 Postalveolar 
or palatal 
 Velar 
 Uvular 
 Glottal 
 
 
 Central 
 Lateral 
 
 
 Plosive 
 voiceless 
 p / pʰ / 
 t / tʰ / 
 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 q / qʰ / 
 ' / ʔ / 
 
 
 voiced 
 b / b / 
 &#160; 
 
 D / ɖ / 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 
 
 Affricate 
 voiceless 
 &#160; 
 
 tlh / t͡ɬ / 
 
 ch / t͡ʃ / 
 
 Q / q͡χ / 
 
 
 
 voiced 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 
 j / d͡ʒ / 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 
 
 Fricative 
 voiceless 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 
 S / ʂ / 
 &#160; 
 H / x / 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 
 
 voiced 
 v / v / 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 gh &#160; / ɣ / 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 
 
 Nasal 
 m / m / 
 n / n / 
 
 
 &#160; 
 ng / ŋ / 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 
 
 Trill 
 &#160; 
 r / r / 
( / ɹ / ) 
 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 
 &#160; 
 
 
 Approximant 
 w / w / 
 l / l / 
 &#160; 
 y / j / 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 
 
 There are a few dialectal pronunciation differences:  
 In the Krotmag dialect 
 
 /b/ is replaced by /m/ 
 /ɖ/ is replaced by /ɳ/ 
 
 In the Tak'ev dialect: 
 
 /b/ becomes /mb/ 
 /ɖ/ becomes /ɳɖ/ 
 
 In the Morskan dialect 
 
 / t͡ɬ / is replaced by / t͡s / 
 /x/ is replaced by /h/ at the beginning of syllables, or is dropped at the end of syllables 
 / q͡χ / is replaced by /x/. 
 
 Vowels  
 In contrast to its consonants, Klingon's inventory of vowels is simple, and similar to those of many human languages, such as Spanish. There are five vowels spaced evenly around the vowel space, with two back rounded vowels, and two front, or near-front, unrounded vowels. 
 The two front vowels, 〈 e 〉 and 〈 I 〉 , represent sounds that are found in English, but are more open and lax than a typical English speaker might assume when reading Klingon text written in the Latin alphabet, thus causing the consonants of a word to be more prominent. This enhances the sense that Klingon is a clipped and harsh-sounding language. 
 
 Vowels 
 〈 a 〉 &#160;– / ɑ / &#160;– open back unrounded vowel (in English spa ) 
 〈 e 〉 &#160;– / ɛ / &#160;– open-mid front unrounded vowel (in English bed ) 
 〈 I 〉 &#160;– / ɪ / &#160;– near-close near-front unrounded vowel (in English bit ) 
 〈 o 〉 &#160;– / o / &#160;– close-mid back rounded vowel (in French eau ) 
 〈 u 〉 &#160;– / u / &#160;– close back rounded vowel (in Spanish tu ) 
 
 Diphthongs can be analyzed phonetically as the combination of the five vowels plus one of the two semivowels /w/ and /j/ (represented by 〈 w 〉 and 〈 y 〉 , respectively). Thus, the combinations 〈 ay 〉 , 〈 ey 〉 , 〈 Iy 〉 , 〈 oy 〉 , 〈 uy 〉 , 〈 aw 〉 , 〈 ew 〉 and 〈 Iw 〉 are possible. There are no words in the Klingon language that contain * 〈 ow 〉 or * 〈 uw 〉 . 
 Syllable structure  
 Klingon follows a strict syllable structure. A syllable must start with a consonant (which includes the glottal stop) followed by one vowel. In prefixes and other rare syllables, this is enough. More commonly, this consonant-vowel pair is followed by one consonant or one of three biconsonantal codas: /- w' &#160;- y' &#160;- rgh /. Thus, ta "record", tar "poison" and targh "targ" (a type of animal) are all legal syllable forms, but * tarD and * ar are not. Despite this, one suffix takes the shape vowel+consonant: the endearment suffix - oy . 
 Stress  
 In verbs , the stressed syllable is usually the verbal stem itself, as opposed to a prefix or any suffixes, except when a suffix ending with 〈 ' 〉 is separated from the verb by at least one other suffix, in which case the suffix ending in 〈 ' 〉 is also stressed. In addition, stress may shift to a suffix that is meant to be emphasized. 
 In nouns , the final syllable of the stem (the noun itself, excluding any affixes) is stressed. If any syllables ending in 〈 ' 〉 are present, the stress shifts to those syllables. 
 The stress in other words seems to be variable, but this is not a serious issue because most of these words are only one syllable in length. There are some words which should fall under the rules above, but do not, although using the standard rules would still be acceptable. 
 Grammar  
 Main article: Klingon grammar 
 Klingon is an agglutinative language, using mainly affixes in order to alter the function or meaning of words. Some nouns have inherently plural forms, such as jengva' "plate" (vs. ngop "plates"), but most nouns require a suffix to express plurality explicitly. Depending on the type of noun (body part, being capable of using language, or neither) the suffix changes. For beings capable of using language, the suffix is -pu' , as in tlhInganpu' , meaning " Klingons ," or jaghpu' , meaning "enemies". For body parts, the plural suffix is -Du' , as in mInDu' , "eyes". For items that are neither body parts nor capable of speech, the suffix is -mey , such as in Hovmey ("stars"), or targhmey ("targs") for a Klingon animal somewhat resembling a boar. (However, a plural suffix is never obligatory. To say "The stars are beautiful", 'IH Hovmey and 'IH Hov are equally grammatical, although the second can also mean "The star is beautiful".) 
 The words loD and be' , which on their own mean "man" and "woman" respectively, can be used in compound words to describe gender. For example, from puq ("child") this process derives puqloD ("son") and puqbe' ("daughter"). 
 Klingon nouns take suffixes to indicate grammatical number . There are three noun classes , two levels of deixis , and a possession and syntactic function. In all, twenty-nine noun suffixes from five classes may be employed: jupoypu'na'wI'vaD "for my beloved true friends". A word may carry no more than one suffix from each class, and the classes have a specific order of appearance. 
 Verbs in Klingon take a prefix indicating the number and person of the subject and object, whereas suffixes are taken from nine ordered classes, and a special suffix class called rovers. Each of the four known rovers has a unique rule controlling its position among the suffixes in the verb. Verbs are marked for aspect , certainty, predisposition and volition, dynamic, causative , mood , negation , and honorific . The Klingon verb has two moods: indicative and imperative . 
 The most common word order in Klingon is Object Verb Subject , and, in most cases, the word order is the exact reverse of English for an equivalent sentence: 
 
 
 DaH mojaq-mey-vam DI-vuS-nIS-be' 'e' vI-Har 
now suffix -PL-DEM 1PL.A.3PL.P- limit-need -NEG that 1SG.A.3SG.P- believe
"I believe that we do not need to limit these suffixes now."
 
 (Hyphens are used in the above only to illustrate the use of affixes. Hyphens are not used in Klingon.) 
 An important aspect of Klingon grammar is its "ungrammaticality". Shortening of communicative statements is common, and is called "Clipped Klingon" ( tlhIngan Hol poD or, more simply, Hol poD ) and Ritualized Speech  
 Writing systems  
 
 
 
  
Qapla' (success) 
 
 
 Main article: Klingon writing systems 
 When written in the Latin alphabet, Klingon is unusual in being case-sensitive , with some letters written in capitals and others in lowercase. In one case, q and Q , there is an actual case-sensitive pair representing two different consonants. Capitals are generally reserved for uvular or retroflex consonants pronounced further back in the mouth or throat than is normal for the corresponding English sounds, as with D , Q , and S . (However, H , pronounced like the 〈 ch 〉 in German "ach" or Scottish "loch", is further forward in the throat than English /h/.) One phoneme, the vowel I (as in i ), is written capital for no apparent reason, and can pose problems when writing Klingon in non-serif fonts such as Arial , as it looks almost the same as the consonant l (as in L ), and has led some Klingon enthusiasts to write it lowercase, as i , like the other vowels. To avoid this problem, a serifed font that clearly distinguishes I and l such as Courier has traditionally been employed for writing Klingon in the Latin alphabet. 
 Klingon is often written (transliterated) to the Latin alphabet as used above, but, on the television series, the Klingons use their own alien writing system. In The Klingon Dictionary , this alphabet is named as pIqaD , but no information is given about it. When Klingon symbols are used in Star Trek productions, they are merely decorative graphic elements, designed to emulate real writing and create an appropriate atmosphere. Enthusiasts have settled on the name pIqaD for this writing system. 
 The Astra Image Corporation designed the symbols currently used to "write" Klingon for Star Trek: The Motion Picture , although these symbols are often incorrectly attributed to Michael Okuda .  They based the letters on the Klingon battlecruiser hull markings (three letters) first created by Matt Jefferies and on Tibetan writing because the script has sharp letter forms—used as a testament to the Klingons' love for knives and blades. 
 For April Fools' Day in 2013, Nokia and typography company Dalton Maag claimed to have used "communication devices to far-flung star systems"  
 Vocabulary  
 A design principle of the Klingon language is the great degree of lexical-cultural correlation in the vocabulary. For example, there are several words meaning "to fight" or "to clash against," each having a different degree of intensity. There is an abundance of words relating to warfare and weaponry and also a great variety of curses (cursing is considered a fine art in Klingon culture). This helps lend a particular character to the language. 
 There are also many in-jokes built into the language.  For example, the word for "pair" is chang'eng , a reference to the twins Chang and Eng ; the word for "ritualized torture by women" is " be'joy " ( be' means "woman") and the word for "fish" is ghotI' . 
 Example sentences  
 
 tlhIngan Hol Dajatlh'a'? 
 Do you speak Klingon? 
 jIyajbe'. 
 I don't understand. 
 Dochvetlh vISoplaHbe'. 
 I can't eat that thing. 
 bIlughbe'. 
 You are wrong. 
 bortaS bIr jablu'DI' reH QaQqu' nay'. 
 Revenge is a dish best served cold. (lit: When cold revenge is served, the dish is always very good) 
 Heghlu'meH QaQ jajvam. 
 Today is a good day to die. 
 
 The KLI has hosted wordplay contests, with challenges to invent new Klingon phrases using natural language word play such as palindromes , pangrams , and spoonerisms .  Winning sentences include: 
 
 jIl moH ghajjaj jaghHomlIj. 
 May your rival have an ugly neighbor. 
 vIt'e' naD lalDan 'e' tIv. 
 He enjoys religion praising truth. 
 tlhab 'oS 'Iw; HoHwI' So' batlh. 
 Blood represents freedom; honor hides the killer. 
 romuluSngan Hol yIjatlh. He'So' QIchlIj. 
 Speak Romulan! Your accent stinks. 
 vavlI' quv Say'moHmeH nuj bIQ vIlo'chugh, nuj bIQ vIlammoH. 
 If I use spit (mouth water) to clean your father's honor, I only dirty the spit. 
 mo'Dajvo' pa'wIjDaq je narghpu' He'So'bogh SajlIj. 
 Your stinking pet has escaped from its cage and appeared in my quarters. 
 qajunpaQHeylIjmo' batlh DuSuvqang charghwI' 'It. 
 Because of your apparent audacity the depressed conqueror is willing to fight you. 
 nobwI''a'pu'qoqvam'e' nuHegh'eghrupqa'moHlaHbe'law'lI'neS SeH'eghtaHghach'a'na'chajmo'. 
 The so-called great benefactors are seemingly unable to cause us to prepare to resume honorable suicide (in progress) due to their definite self control. 
 be'HomDu'na'wIjtIq'a'Du'na'vaD ghureghqangqa'moHlaHqu'be'taH'a' Somraw'a'meyna'wIj'e'? 
 Is it not that my many, large, scattered muscles are quite capable of swelling for the benefit of the hearts of many scattered girls? 
 
 See also  
 
 
 
  
 Star Trek portal 
 
 
  
 Language portal 
 
 
  
 Constructed languages portal 
 
 
 
 
 Alien language 
 Klingon culture 
 Klingon grammar 
 Klingon Language Institute 
 Stovokor , a death metal band whose lyrics are written in Klingon 
 ’u’ , the first Klingon opera 
 Klingon Christmas Carol , a staged adaptation of Charles Dickens 's A Christmas Carol in Klingon 
 
 Notes  
 
 
 ^  According to Lawrence Schoen , director of the KLI . Wired 4.08: Dejpu'bogh Hov rur qablli!* 
 ^  a   b   c  Okrand, Mark; Adams, Michael; Hendriks-Hermans, Judith; Kroon, Sjaak (December 1, 2011). "Wild and Whirling Words: The Invention and Use of Klingon". In Adams, Michael. From Elvish to Klingon: Exploring Invented Languages . Oxford University Press. pp.&#160;111–134. ISBN &#160; 978-0-192-80709-0 . &#160; 
 ^  Okrent, Arika . In the Land of Invented Languages . Spiegel &amp; Grau, 2009, pp. 266-267. ISBN 978-0-385-52788-0 
 ^  McIntyre, Vonda (1984). Star Trek III: The Search for Spock . Pocket Books. p.&#160;272. ISBN &#160; 0-671-49500-3 . &#160;  |accessdate= requires |url= ( help ) 
 ^  Lisa Napoli (October 7, 2004). "Online Diary: tlhIngan maH!" . New York Times . &#160; 
 ^  "NAU.edu" . Jan.ucc.nau.edu . Retrieved 2013-12-11 . &#160; 
 ^  There's No Klingon Word for Hello , Slate magazine, May 7, 2009. Retrieved 2009-05-08. 
 ^  An attribution to Okrand may be found in the museum displays at the San Juan Bautista , California State Historic Park, which includes a short mention of the local Mutsun native people whom Okrand studied for his thesis. 
 ^  Okrent 2009, pp.270-271 
 ^  "But what about speakers in the sense of people who can carry on a spontaneous live conversation in Klingon? (...) I would say, oh, twenty or so. Maybe thirty." Arika Okrent. In the Land of Invented Languages. New York (Spiegel &amp; Grau). 2010, p. 273. 
 ^  "tlhIngan-Hol Archive, August 13, 2012" . Kli.org. 2012-08-13 . Retrieved 2013-12-11 . &#160; 
 ^  Earthlings: Ugly Bags of Mostly Water, Mostly Water LLC, 2004 . Retrieved 2009-11-27. 
 ^  Dean, Eddie (1996-08-09). "Klingon as a Second Language D’Armond Speers Teaches His Son an Alien Tongue, Washington City Paper, August 9, 1996" . Washingtoncitypaper.com . Retrieved 2013-12-11 . &#160; 
 ^  Fry's Planet Word , BBC TV, 2011. 
 ^  "Babble On Revisited, Wired, Issue 7.08, August 1999" . Wired.com. 2009-01-04 . Retrieved 2013-12-11 . &#160; 
 ^  " tlhIngan Hol yejHaD qep'a' | Information about the 2013 Conference of the Klingon Language Institute" . Speakklingon.info. 2013-03-13 . Retrieved 2013-12-11 . &#160; 
 ^  "Klingon Classes for Everyone" . www.qepHom.de . Retrieved 2013-12-11 . &#160; 
 ^  Film Review , The Boston Globe , 2011-3-18, accessed 2011-7-25. 
 ^  "Frasieronline details of season 10, episode 6" . Frasieronline.co.uk . Retrieved 2013-12-11 . &#160; 
 ^  "Shortland Street Recap: Tuesday 21st January (5408)" . throng ltd. 2014-01-21 . Retrieved 2014-01-21 . &#160; 
 ^  Klingon Christmas Carol brought to the stage , The Telegraph , 2010-12-21, accessed 2010-12-23. 
 ^  Marks, Peter (August 29, 2010). "To beam, or not to beam?". Washington Post . p.&#160;E1. &#160; 
 ^  Holt, A. J. (1995). Watch me . New York: St. Martin's Press. p.&#160;73. ISBN &#160; 0312136145 . " QaStaHvlS wa'ram loS SaD Hugh SlijlaH  qetbogh loD (Four thousand throats may be cut in one night by a running man.)" &#160; 
 ^  Klingon interface at Google 
 ^  strip of January 12, 2003 The phrase is " joH'a' 'oH wIj DevwI' jIH DIchDaq Hutlh pagh " (Yahweh is my shepherd: I shall lack nothing.) 
 ^  "Language Log&#160;» "Don't you know it's not just the Eskimo " " . Languagelog.ldc.upenn.edu . Retrieved 2013-12-11 . &#160; 
 ^  Klingon as Linguistic Capital, Yens Wahlgren, June 2000 . Retrieved 2009-11-27. 
 ^  Martin, Will (2005-12-15). "Klingon Words Not in The Klingon Dictionary" . KLI . Retrieved 2014-01-21 . &#160; 
 ^  Litaer, Lieven (2013-08-20). "New canonical klingon words" . qepHom . Retrieved 2014-01-21 . &#160; 
 ^  Marc Okrand, Klingon for the Galactic Traveler , Simon &amp; Schuster, 1997. 
 ^  KLI Wiki, Canon sources . Retrieved 2009-11-27. 
 ^  Okrand, Marc (1997). Klingon for the Galactic Traveller . New York: Pocket Books. pp.&#160;18–24. ISBN &#160; 978-0671009953 . &#160; 
 ^  Marc Okrand, Klingon for the Galactic Traveler . Simon &amp; Schuster, 1997. 
 ^  Symbols attributed to Okuda: the Klingon Language Institute's Klingon FAQ (edited by d'Armond Speers ), question 2.13 by Will Martin (August 18, 1994). Symbols incorrectly attributed to Okuda: KLI founder Lawrence M. Schoen's "On Orthography" (PDF) , citing J. Lee's "An Interview with Michael Okuda" in the KLI's journal HolQed 1.1 (March 1992), p. 11. Symbols actually designed by Astra Image Corporation: Michael Everson's Proposal...  
 ^  a   b  Nokia 2013. Pure Klingon 
 ^  Puns in the Vocabulary of tlhIngan Hol , Retrieved 2009-11-27. 
 ^  "Klingon Wordplay Contests" . Kli.org. 2004-05-07 . Retrieved 2013-12-11 . &#160; 
 
 
 References  
 
 Bernard Comrie , 1995, "The Paleo-Klingon numeral system". HolQeD 4.4: 6–10. 
 Klingon ConScript Unicode Registry (CSUR) 
 pIqaD Support 
 Klingon (pIqaD) Unicode font 
 Klingon text converter (transliteration) 
 
 External links  
 
 
 
 Look up Appendix:Klingon in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Klingon 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Klingon proverbs 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikiversity has learning materials about Topic:Klingon 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikinews has related news: 
 
 
 
 
 Elvish, Klingon and Na'vi: Constructed languages gain foothold in film 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Klingon language . 
 
 
 
 Klingon Language Institute 
 Klingonska Akademien 
 qepHom Saarbrücken The largest annual Klingon Language Meeting in Europe 
 Learn Klingon - EuroTalk , EuroTalk 's Klingon language homepage 
 Homepage of tlhIngan Qummem from qe'San translator who worked with Marc Okrand on the Talk Now! Learn Klingon language course from EuroTalk 
 Klingon and its User: A Sociolinguistic Profile , a sociolinguistics MA thesis 
 Klingon as Linguistic Capital: A Sociologic Study of Nineteen Advanced Klingonists (PDF) 
 Is Klingon an Ohlonean language? A comparison of Mutsun and Klingon 
 Omniglot: Klingon Alphabet 
 Eatoni Ergonomics' Klingon page includes BDF, TTF fonts and a Klingon text entry demo 
 paq'batlh: The Klingon Epic 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 t 
 e 
 
 
 Constructed languages (conlangs) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Types and concepts 
 
 
 
 Artistic language 
 Constructed script 
 Engineered language 
 Fictional language 
 International auxiliary language (IAL) 
 Language game 
 Musical language 
 Relexification 
 Universal language 
 Zonal language 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Conlangs 
 
 
 
 Afrihili 
 Atlantean 
 Balaibalan 
 Blissymbols 
 Brithenig 
 Damin 
 Dothraki 
 Enochian 
 Esperanto 
 Glosa 
 Idiom Neutral 
 Ido 
 Interlingua 
 Ithkuil ( Ilaksh ) 
 Kalaba-X 
 Kēlen 
 Klingon 
 Láadan 
 Languages of Middle-earth 
 Langue nouvelle (1765) 
 Lingua Franca Nova 
 Lingua Ignota 
 Loglan 
 Lojban 
 Na'vi 
 Nadsat 
 Nal Bino 
 Neo 
 Novial 
 Occidental 
 Quenya 
 Ro 
 Sambahsa 
 Sindarin 
 Slovianski 
 Solresol 
 Sona 
 Spokil 
 Talossan 
 Teonaht 
 Toki Pona 
 Tsolyáni 
 Uropi 
 Valyrian 
 Verdurian 
 Volapük 
 Wenedyk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Resources 
 
 
 
 Codes for constructed languages 
 Conlanger 
 Language Creation Conference 
 Language Creation Society 
 Zompist.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Portal 
 WikiProject 
 List of constructed languages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 t 
 e 
 
 
 Star Trek 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Television series 
 
 
 
 The Original Series ( episodes ) 
 The Animated Series ( episodes ) 
 The Next Generation ( episodes ) 
 Deep Space Nine ( episodes ) 
 Voyager ( episodes ) 
 Enterprise ( episodes ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Feature films 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Original Series 
 
 
 
 
 The Motion Picture 
 The Wrath of Khan 
 The Search for Spock 
 The Voyage Home 
 The Final Frontier 
 The Undiscovered Country 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Next Generation 
 
 
 
 
 Generations 
 First Contact 
 Insurrection 
 Nemesis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reboot series 
 
 
 
 
 Star Trek 
 Into Darkness 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Other media 
 
 
 
 Games 
 Literature
 
 Novels 
 Comics 
 Reference books 
 
 
 Documentaries
 
 The Captains 
 Trek Nation 
 Trekkies 
 Trekkies 2 
 
 
 Stage
 
 ’u’ (Klingon opera) 
 Klingon Christmas Carol 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miscellaneous 
 
 
 
 Characters 
 Planets 
 
 A–B 
 C–F 
 G–L 
 M–Q 
 R–S 
 T–Z 
 
 
 Prime Directive 
 Alien races 
 
 Klingons 
 Romulans 
 Vulcans 
 Borg 
 
 
 United Federation of Planets 
 Timeline 
 Stardates 
 Ships 
 
 USS Enterprise 
 USS Defiant 
 USS Voyager 
 
 
 Starfleet 
 Deep Space Nine 
 Weapons 
 Mirror Universe 
 Ranks and insignia / Uniforms 
 Galactic quadrant 
 Space regions 
 Crossovers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Related topics 
 
 
 
 Canon 
 Comparison to Star Wars 
 Cultural influence 
 Fan productions 
 Fandom 
 Medicine 
 Memory Alpha 
 Norway Corporation 
 Physics 
 Planet of the Titans 
 Production staff 
 
 Gene Roddenberry 
 
 
 Sexuality 
 Star Trek: The Experience 
 Star Trek: The Exhibition 
 Star Trek: Phase II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Book 
  Category 
  Portal 
  WikiProject 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 								 
				Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Klingon_language&amp;oldid=597284719 "				 
												 Categories : Languages with ISO 639-2 code Klingon language Agglutinative languages Constructed languages Fictional languages Object–verb–subject languages  Hidden categories: Pages using citations with accessdate and no URL All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2010 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2013 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2011 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2013 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2013 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2014 Commons category template with no category set Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata  												 
							 
		 
		 
			 Navigation menu 
			 
				 
	 Personal tools 
	 
 Create account Log in 	 
 
				 
					 
	 Namespaces 
	 
					 Article 
					 Talk 
			 
 
 
	 
		 
	 Variants 
	 
		 
					 
	 
 
				 
				 
					 
	 Views 
	 
					 Read 
					 Edit 
					 View history 
			 
 
 
	 Actions 
	 
		 
					 
	 
 
 
	 Search 
	 
					 
					 		 
	 
 
				 
			 
			 
					 
				 
	 Navigation 
	 
		 
			 Main page 
			 Contents 
			 Featured content 
			 Current events 
			 Random article 
			 Donate to Wikipedia 
			 Wikimedia Shop 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Interaction 
	 
		 
			 Help 
			 About Wikipedia 
			 Community portal 
			 Recent changes 
			 Contact page 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Tools 
	 
		 
			 What links here 
			 Related changes 
			 Upload file 
			 Special pages 
			 Permanent link 
			 Page information 
			 Data item 
 Cite this page 		 
	 
 
 
	 Print/export 
	 
		 
			 Create a book 
			 Download as PDF 
			 Printable version 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Languages 
	 
		 
			 Aragonés 
			 Asturianu 
			 Беларуская 
			 Boarisch 
			 Brezhoneg 
			 Català 
			 Čeština 
			 Cymraeg 
			 Dansk 
			 Deutsch 
			 Eesti 
			 Ελληνικά 
			 Español 
			 Esperanto 
			 Euskara 
			 Français 
			 Gaeilge 
			 Galego 
			 한국어 
			 Hrvatski 
			 Ido 
			 Bahasa Indonesia 
			 Italiano 
			 עברית 
			 ქართული 
			 Қазақша 
			 Коми 
			 Latina 
			 Limburgs 
			 Lojban 
			 Bahasa Melayu 
			 Nederlands 
			 Nedersaksies 
			 日本語 
			 Norsk bokmål 
			 Norsk nynorsk 
			 Occitan 
			 Plattdüütsch 
			 Polski 
			 Português 
			 Română 
			 Русский 
			 Simple English 
			 Slovenščina 
			 Српски / srpski 
			 Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски 
			 Suomi 
			 Svenska 
			 Tagalog 
			 Türkçe 
			 Українська 
			 Tiếng Việt 
			 中文 
			 
			 Edit links 
		 
	 
 
			 
		 
		 
							 
											 This page was last modified on 26 February 2014 at 21:59. 
											 Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. 
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
									 
							 
											 Privacy policy 
											 About Wikipedia 
											 Disclaimers 
											 Contact Wikipedia 
											 Developers 
											 Mobile view