Korean language - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 





 
 
		 
		 
		 
			 
			 
						 
						 Korean language 
			 
								 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
								 
												 
					Jump to:					 navigation , 					 search 
				 
				 
 
 Korean 
 
 
 한국어 , 조선말 
 Hangugeo, Chosŏnmal 
 
 
  
 Two names for Korean, Hangugeo and Chosŏnmal , written vertically in hangul 
 
 
 
 Native&#160;to 
 South Korea 
 North Korea 
 Jilin · Liaoning · Heilongjiang , China 
 United States ( Korean American ) 
 Japan ( Koreans in Japan ) 
 Commonwealth of Independent States ( Koryo-saram ) 
 
 
 
 Native speakers 
 
 75 million &#160;(2010)  
 
 
 
 Language family 
 
 
 Altaic (disputed)
 
 Koreanic 
 
 Korean 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Early forms 
 
 
 Old Korean 
 
 Middle Korean 
 
 Korean 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dialects 
 
 Jeju 
 mainland Korean dialects 
 
 
 
 
 Writing system 
 
 Hangul (primary) 
 Hanja ( mixed script ) 
 Korean Braille 
 Cyrillic ( Koryo-mar ) 
 
 
 Official status 
 
 
 
 Official language&#160;in 
 
 &#160; South Korea 
 &#160; North Korea 
  Yanbian , People's Republic of China 
 
 
 
 Recognised minority language&#160;in 
 
 &#160; People's Republic of China 
 &#160; Japan 
 &#160; United States (notable, but no recognised minority languages in the USA) 
 &#160; CIS 
 
 
 Regulated&#160;by 
 
  The National Institute of the Korean Language 
 국립국어원/ 國立國語院 
   Sahoe Kwahagwon Ŏhak Yŏnguso 
 The Language Research Institute of Social Science 
 사회과학원 어학연구소/ 社會科學院 語學研究所 
 
 
 Language codes 
 
 
 ISO 639-1 
 ko 
 
 
 ISO 639-2 
 kor 
 
 
 ISO 639-3 
 Variously: 
 kor &#160;–&#160;Modern Korean 
 okm &#160;–&#160; Middle Korean 
 oko &#160;–&#160; Old Korean 
 
 
 
 Linguist list 
 
 okm Middle Korean 
 
 
 &#160; 
 oko Old Korean 
 
 
 Linguasphere 
 45-AAA-a 
 
 
 
 Countries with native Korean-speaking populations. (Established immigrant communities in green) 
 
 
 
 This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. 
 
 
 
 
 
 This article contains Korean text. Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Hangul and hanja . 
 
 
 Korean ( 한국어 / 조선말 , see below ) is the official language of South Korea and North Korea as well as one of the two official languages in China 's Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture . Approximately 80 million people speak Korean worldwide. For over a millennium, Korean was written with adapted Chinese characters called hanja , complemented by phonetic systems like hyangchal , gugyeol , and idu . In the 15th century, a national writing system called hangul was commissioned by Sejong the Great , but it only came into widespread use in the 20th century, because of the yangban aristocracy's preference for hanja. 
 Most historical linguists classify Korean as a language isolate  The Korean language is agglutinative in its morphology and SOV in its syntax . 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 
 
 1 Names 
 2 Classification 
 3 History 
 4 Geographic distribution 
 
 4.1 Official status 
 
 
 5 Dialects 
 6 Sounds 
 
 6.1 Consonants 
 6.2 Vowels 
 6.3 Allophones 
 6.4 Morphophonemics 
 
 
 7 Grammar 
 8 Speech levels and honorifics 
 
 8.1 Honorifics 
 8.2 Speech levels 
 8.3 Gender and Korean language 
 
 
 9 Vocabulary 
 10 Writing system 
 11 Differences between North Korean and South Korean 
 
 11.1 Pronunciation 
 11.2 Spelling 
 11.3 Spelling and pronunciation 
 11.4 Grammar 
 11.5 Vocabulary 
 11.6 Punctuation 
 
 
 12 Study by non-native learners 
 
 12.1 Korean language tests 
 
 
 13 See also 
 14 References 
 15 Further reading 
 16 External links 
 
 
 
 Names  
 The Korean names for the language are based on the names for Korea used in North and South Korea. 
 In South Korea, the language is most often called Hangungmal ( 한국말 ), or more formally, Hangugeo ( 한국어 ) or Gugeo ( 국어 ); literally "national language"). 
 In North Korea and Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture in China , the language is most often called Chosŏnmal ( 조선말 ), or more formally, Chosŏnŏ ( 조선어 ). 
 On the other hand, Korean people in the former USSR , who refer to themselves as Koryo-saram (고려사람; also Goryeoin ) call the language Goryeomal ( 고려말 ). 
 In mainland China , following the establishment of diplomatic relations with South Korea in 1992, the term Cháoxiǎnyǔ ( 朝鲜语 or the short form: Cháoyǔ ( 朝语 )) has normally been used to refer to the standard language of North Korea and Yanbian , while Hánguóyǔ ( 韩国语 or the short form: Hányǔ ( 韩语 )) is used to refer to the standard language of South Korea. 
 Some older English sources also use the spelling "Corean" to refer to the language, country, and people. The word "Korean" is derived from Goryeo , which is thought to be the first dynasty known to Western countries. 
 Classification  
 While (apart from certain ancient languages of Korea ) the majority of linguists consider Korean to be a language isolate,  there have been attempts to link it with other languages in the region. 
 Korean is similar to the Altaic languages in lacking certain grammatical elements, including articles , fusional morphology and relative pronouns . Since Ramstedt 's 1928 article, some linguists  
 The hypothesis that Korean might be related to Japanese has had some supporters due to some apparent overlap in vocabulary and similar grammatical features that have been elaborated upon by such researchers as Samuel E. Martin  :5 . 
 Some linguists, most notably Alexander Vovin , have argued that the indicated similarities between Japanese and Korean are not due to any genetic relationship, but rather to a sprachbund effect and heavy borrowing, especially from ancient Korean into Western Old Japanese.  (See Classification of Japonic for further details on a possible relationship.) 
 Among ancient languages, various closer relatives of Korean have been proposed, constituting a possible small Koreanic language family. Some classify the language of Jeju Island as a distinct modern Koreanic language. 
 History  
 Main article: History of the Korean language 
 Korean is descended from Proto-Korean , Old Korean , Middle Korean and Modern Korean . Since the Korean War , contemporary North–South differences have developed in standard Korean, including variance in pronunciation, verb inflection, and vocabulary. 
 Geographic distribution  
 See also: Korean diaspora 
 Korean is spoken by the Korean people in North Korea and South Korea and by the Korean diaspora in many countries including the People's Republic of China , Japan , and the United States . Korean-speaking minorities exist in these states, but because of cultural assimilation into host countries, not all ethnic Koreans may speak it with native fluency. 
 Official status  
 Korean is the official language of South Korea and North Korea . It is also one of the two official languages of the Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture in China. 
 In South Korea, the regulatory body for Korean is the Seoul -based National Institute of the Korean Language ( 국립국어원 ; 國立國語院), which was created by presidential decree on January 23, 1991. In North Korea, the regulatory body is the Language Institute of the Academy of Social Sciences ( 사회과학원 어학연구소 ; 社會科學院語學研究所, Sahoe Kwahagwon Ŏhak Yŏnguso ). 
 Dialects  
 Main article: Korean dialects 
 
 
 
  
Dialects of Korean 
 
 
 Korean has numerous small local dialects (called mal ( 말 )  One of the more salient differences between dialects is the use of tone: speakers of Seoul dialect make use of vowel length, whereas speakers of the Gyeongsang dialect maintain the pitch accent of Middle Korean. Some dialects are conservative, maintaining Middle Korean sounds (such as z, β, ə ) which have been lost from the standard language, whereas others are highly innovative. 
 There is substantial evidence for a history of extensive dialect levelling , or even convergent evolution or intermixture of two or more originally distinct linguistic stocks, within the Korean language and its dialects. Many Korean dialects have basic vocabulary that is etymologically distinct from vocabulary of identical meaning in Standard Korean or other dialects, such as South Jeolla dialect /kur/ vs. Standard Korean 입 /ip/ "mouth" or Gyeongsang dialect /t͡ɕʌŋ.ɡu.d͡ʑi/ vs. Standard Korean /puːt͡ɕʰu/ " garlic chives ". This suggests that the Korean Peninsula may have at one time been much more linguistically diverse than it is at present. See also the Buyeo languages hypothesis . 
 There are few clear boundaries between Korean dialects, and they are typically partially grouped according to the regions of Korea . 
 
 
 Standard language 
 Where used 
 
 
 Seoul 
 Seoul (서울); very similar to Incheon (인천/仁川) and most of Gyeonggi (경기/京畿), west of Gangwon-do (Yeongseo region) 
 
 
 Munhwaŏ 
 Northern standard. Based on Seoul dialect.  
 
 
 Regional dialects 
 Where used 
 
 
 Hamgyŏng (Northeastern) 
 Rasŏn , most of Hamgyŏng region, northeast P'yŏngan , Ryanggang (North Korea), Jilin (China) 
 
 
 P'yŏngan (northwestern) 
 P'yŏngan region, P'yŏngyang , Chagang , Hwanghae , northern North Hamgyŏng (North Korea), Liaoning (China) 
 
 
 Central 
 Seoul , Incheon , Gyeonggi , Daejeon , Chungcheong (South Korea), Yeongseo ( Gangwon-do (South Korea) / Kangwŏn (North Korea) west of the Taebaek Mountains ) 
 
 
 Yeongdong (East coast) 
 Yeongdong region ( Gangwon-do (South Korea) / Kangwŏn (North Korea) east of the Taebaek Mountains ) 
 
 
 Gyeongsang (Southeastern) 
 Busan , Daegu , Ulsan , Gyeongsang region (South Korea) 
 
 
 Jeolla (Southwestern) 
 Gwangju , Jeolla region (South Korea) 
 
 
 Jeju 
 Jeju Island/Province (South Korea) 
 
 
 Sounds  
 
 
  
 This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. 
 
 
 Main article: Korean phonology 
 Consonants  
 
 
 
  
The Korean consonants 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bilabial 
 Alveolar 
 Post- 
alveolar 
 Velar 
 Glottal 
 
 
 Nasal 
 ㅁ /m/ 
 ㄴ /n/ 
 
 ㅇ /ŋ/  
 
 
 
 Plosive 
and 
 Affricate 
 plain 
 ㅂ /p/ 
 ㄷ /t/ 
 ㅈ /t͡ɕ/ 
 ㄱ /k/ 
 
 
 
 tense 
 ㅃ /p͈/ 
 ㄸ /t͈/ 
 ㅉ /t͡ɕ͈/ 
 ㄲ /k͈/ 
 
 
 
 aspirated 
 ㅍ /pʰ/ 
 ㅌ /tʰ/ 
 ㅊ /t͡ɕʰ/ 
 ㅋ /kʰ/ 
 
 
 
 Fricative 
 plain 
 
 ㅅ /sʰ/ 
 
 
 ㅎ /h/ 
 
 
 tense 
 
 ㅆ /s͈/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 Liquid 
 /w/ 1 
 ㄹ /l/ 
 /j/ 1 
 
 
 
 
 1 The liquids /w/ and /j/ are represented in Korean writing by modifications to vowel symbols (see below). 
 The IPA symbol 〈 ◌͈ 〉 (a subscript double straight quotation mark, shown here with a placeholder circle) is used to denote the tensed consonants /p͈/, /t͈/, /k͈/, /t͡ɕ͈/, /s͈/ . Its official use in the Extensions to the IPA is for 'strong' articulation, but is used in the literature for faucalized voice . The Korean consonants also have elements of stiff voice , but it is not yet known how typical this is of faucalized consonants. They are produced with a partially constricted glottis and additional subglottal pressure in addition to tense vocal tract walls, laryngeal lowering, or other expansion of the larynx. 
 Vowels  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
The basic Korean vowels 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Monophthongs 
 /i/ ㅣ , /e/ ㅔ , /ɛ/ ㅐ , /a/ ㅏ * , /o/ ㅗ , /u/ ㅜ , /ʌ/ ㅓ , /ɯ/ ㅡ , /ø/ ㅚ 
 
 
 Vowels preceded by intermediaries, 
or Diphthongs 
 /je/ ㅖ , /jɛ/ ㅒ , /ja/ ㅑ , /wi/ ㅟ , /we/ ㅞ , /wɛ/ ㅙ , /wa/ ㅘ , /ɰi/ ㅢ , /jo/ ㅛ , /ju/ ㅠ , /jʌ/ ㅕ , /wʌ/ ㅝ 
 
 
 ^* ㅏ is closer to a near-open central vowel (  ), though 〈 a 〉 is still used for tradition. 
 Allophones  
 /s/ is aspirated  for most speakers (but see North–South differences in the Korean language ). This occurs with the tense fricative and all the affricates as well. At the end of a syllable, /s/ changes to /t/ (Example: beoseot (버섯) 'mushroom'). 
 /h/ may become a bilabial  
 /p, t, t͡ɕ, k/ become voiced  between voiced sounds. 
 /m, n/ frequently denasalize to  at the beginnings of words. 
 /l/ becomes alveolar flap  . 
 Traditionally, /l/ was disallowed at the beginning of a word. It disappeared before  . The traditional prohibition of word-initial /l/ became a morphological rule called "initial law" (두음법칙) in South Korea, which pertains to Sino-Korean vocabulary. Such words retain their word-initial /l/ in North Korea. 
 All obstruents (plosives, affricates, fricatives) have no audible release ,  , at the end of a word. 
 Plosive stops /p, t, k/ become nasal stops  before nasal stops. 
 Hangul spelling does not reflect these assimilatory pronunciation rules, but rather maintains the underlying, partly historical morphology . Given this, it is sometimes hard to tell which actual phonemes are present in a certain word. 
 One difference between the pronunciation standards of North and South Korea is the treatment of initial  . For example, 
 
 "labor" – north: r odong (로동), south: n odong (노동) 
 "history" – north: ry ŏksa (력사), south: y eoksa (역사) 
 "female" – north: ny ŏja (녀자), south: y eoja (여자) 
 
 Morphophonemics  
 Main article: Morphophonology 
 Grammatical morphemes may change shape depending on the preceding sounds. Examples include -eun/-neun (-은/-는) and -i/-ga (-이/-가). Sometimes sounds may be inserted instead. Examples include -eul/-reul (-을/-를), -euro/-ro (-으로/-로), -eseo/-seo (-에서/-서), -ideunji/-deunji (-이든지/-든지) and -iya/-ya (-이야/-야). However, -euro/-ro is somewhat irregular, since it will behave differently after a rieul consonant. 
 
 Korean particles 
 
 After a consonant 
 After a rieul 
 After a vowel 
 
 
 -ui (-의) 
 
 
 -eun (-은) 
 -neun (-는) 
 
 
 -i (-이) 
 -ga (-가) 
 
 
 -eul (-을) 
 -reul (-를) 
 
 
 -gwa (-과) 
 -wa (-와) 
 
 
 -euro (-으로) 
 -ro (-로) 
 
 
 Some verbs may also change shape morphophonemically. 
 Grammar  
 Main article: Korean grammar 
 Korean is an agglutinative language . The Korean language is traditionally considered to have nine parts of speech. For details, see Korean parts of speech . Modifiers generally precede the modified words, and in the case of verb modifiers, can be serially appended. The basic form of a Korean sentence is subject–object–verb , but the verb is the only required and immovable element. 
 
 
 A : 
 &#160; 
 가게에 
 &#160; 
 갔어요? 
 
 
 
 
 gage-e 
 
 ga-ss-eo-yo 
 
 
 
 
 store +  
 
  
 
 
 
 "Did  go to the store?" ("you" implied in conversation) 
 
 
 
 B : 
 &#160; 
 예. (or 네.) 
 
 
 
 
 ye (or ne ) 
 
 
 
 
 yes 
 
 
 
 "Yes." 
 
 Speech levels and honorifics  
 Main article: Korean honorifics 
 The relationship between a speaker or writer and his or her subject and audience is paramount in Korean, and the grammar reflects this. The relationship between speaker/writer and subject referent is reflected in honorifics , while that between speaker/writer and audience is reflected in speech level . 
 Honorifics  
 When talking about someone superior in status, a speaker or writer usually uses special nouns or verb endings to indicate the subject's superiority. Generally, someone is superior in status if he/she is an older relative, a stranger of roughly equal or greater age, or an employer, teacher, customer, or the like. Someone is equal or inferior in status if he/she is a younger stranger, student, employee or the like. Nowadays, there are special endings which can be used on declarative, interrogative, and imperative sentences; and both honorific or normal sentences. They are made for easier and faster use of Korean. 
 Honorifics in traditional Korea were strictly hierarchical. The caste and estate systems possessed patterns and usages much more complex and stratified than those used today. The intricate structure of the Korean honorific system flourished in traditional culture and society. Honorifics in contemporary Korea are now used for people who are psychologically distant. Honorifics are also used for people who are superior in status. For example, older relatives, people who are older, teachers, and employers.  
 Speech levels  
 There are seven verb paradigms or speech levels in Korean , and each level has its own unique set of verb endings which are used to indicate the level of formality of a situation.  Unlike honorifics —which are used to show respect towards the referent (the person spoken of) — speech levels are used to show respect towards a speaker's or writer's audience (the person spoken to). The names of the seven levels are derived from the non-honorific imperative form of the verb 하다 ( hada , "do") in each level, plus the suffix 체 ("che", hanja : 體 ), which means "style". 
 The highest six levels are generally grouped together as jondaenmal (존댓말), while the lowest level ( haeche , 해체) is called banmal (반말) in Korean. 
 Nowadays, younger-generation speakers no longer feel obligated to lower their usual regard toward the referent. It is common to see younger people talk to their older relatives with banmal (반말). This is not out of disrespect, but instead it shows the intimacy and the closeness of the relationship between the two speakers. Transformations in social structures and attitudes in today's rapidly changing society have brought about change in the way people speak.  
 Gender and Korean language  
 Traditionally Korean women are often viewed as subservient to men, and this in turn is observed in their everyday speech patterns. Some examples of this can be seen in: (1) a woman’s use of softer tone in order to minimize conflict or aggression; (2) a married woman introducing herself as someone’s mother or wife, not with her own name; (3) the presence of gender differences in titles and occupational terms (for example, a sajang is a company president and yŏsajang is a female company president.); (4) and females sometimes using more tag questions and rising tones in statements, much like the way that young children talk.  
 In Western societies, individuals will avoid expressions of power asymmetry, mutually addressing each other by their first names for the sake of solidarity. Between two people of asymmetrical status in a Korean society, people tend to emphasize differences in status for the sake of solidarity. Koreans prefer to use kinship terms rather than any other terms of reference.  
 Vocabulary  
 The core of the Korean vocabulary is made up of native Korean words. A significant proportion of the vocabulary, especially words that denote abstract ideas, are Sino-Korean words ,  either 
 
 directly borrowed from written Chinese , or 
 coined in Korea or Japan using Chinese characters , 
 
 The exact proportion of Sino-Korean vocabulary is a matter of debate. Sohn (2001) stated 50–60%.  
 Korean has two numeral systems : one native, and one borrowed from Sino-Korean. 
 To a much lesser extent, some words have also been borrowed from Mongolian and other languages. Conversely, the Korean language itself has also contributed some loanwords to other languages, most notably the Tsushima dialect of Japanese. 
 The vast majority of loanwords other than Sino-Korean come from modern times, approximately 90% of which are from English .  the Japanese approximated using the kanji 獨逸 doitsu that were then accepted into the Korean language by their Sino-Korean pronunciation: 獨 &#160; dok + 逸 &#160; il = Dogil . In South Korean official use, a number of other Sino-Korean country names have been replaced with phonetically oriented hangulizations of the countries' endonyms or English names. 
 Because of such a prevalence of English in modern Korean culture and society, lexical borrowing is inevitable. English-derived Korean, or ' Konglish ' (콩글리쉬), is increasingly used. The vocabulary of the Korean language is roughly 5% loanwords (excluding Sino-Korean vocabulary).  
 As in Japanese, Korean uses words adapted from English in ways that may seem strange to native English speakers. For example, in soccer heading ( 헤딩 ) is used as a noun meaning a 'header', while fighting ( 화이팅 ) is a term of encouragement like 'come on'/'go (on)' in English. Something that is 'service' ( 서비스 ) is free or 'on the house'. A building referred to as an 'apart' ( 아파트 ) is an 'apartment' (but in fact refers to a residence more akin to a condominium) and a type of pencil that is called 'sharp' ( 샤프 ) is a mechanical pencil. 
 North Korean vocabulary shows a tendency to prefer native Korean over Sino-Korean or foreign borrowings, especially with recent political objectives aimed at eliminating foreign influences on the Korean language in the North. In the early years, the North Korean government tried to eliminate Sino-Korean words. Consequently, South Korean may have several Sino-Korean or foreign borrowings which are not in North Korean. 
 Writing system  
 
 
  
 
 
 Korean writing systems 
 
 
 Hangul 
 
 
 Hanja 
 
 
 
 
 Hyangchal 
 Gugyeol 
 Idu 
 
 
 
 
 Mixed script 
 
 
 Braille 
 
 
 Transcription 
 
 
 
 
 McCune–Reischauer 
 Revised Romanization (South) 
 Sahoe Kwahagwŏn (North) 
 Yale (scholar) 
 Kontsevich (Cyrillic) 
 
 
 
 
 Transliteration 
 
 
 
 
 ISO/TR 11941 
 RR (South) 
 SKATS (coding) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 t 
 e 
 
 
 
 
 
 Main articles: Hangul and Korean Braille 
 See also: Hangul consonant and vowel tables 
 Formerly, the languages of the Korean peninsula were written using hanja, called hyangchal or idu : the use of Chinese characters either as rebuses to stand for Korean words, or as synonyms for those words. Writing was confined to the ruling elite, who most often wrote only in Classical Chinese. 
 Sejong the Great promulgated the Korean alphabet in 1446. Korean is now written almost exclusively in hangul. While South Korean schools still teach 1,800 hanja, North Korea abolished hanja decades ago. 
 Below is a chart of the Korean alphabet's symbols and their canonical IPA values: 
 
 Consonants 
 
 Hangul 
 ㅂ 
 ㄷ 
 ㅈ 
 ㄱ 
 ㅃ 
 ㄸ 
 ㅉ 
 ㄲ 
 ㅍ 
 ㅌ 
 ㅊ 
 ㅋ 
 ㅅ 
 ㅎ 
 ㅆ 
 ㅁ 
 ㄴ 
 ㅇ 
 ㄹ 
 
 
 RR 
 b 
 d 
 j 
 g 
 pp 
 tt 
 jj 
 kk 
 p 
 t 
 ch 
 k 
 s 
 h 
 ss 
 m 
 n 
 ng 
 r , l 
 
 
 IPA 
 p 
 t 
 t͡ɕ 
 k 
 p͈ 
 t͈ 
 t͡ɕ͈ 
 k͈ 
 pʰ 
 tʰ 
 t͡ɕʰ 
 kʰ 
 s 
 h 
 s͈ 
 m 
 n 
 ŋ 
 ɾ , l 
 
 
 
 Vowels 
 
 Hangul 
 ㅣ 
 ㅔ 
 ㅚ 
 ㅐ 
 ㅏ 
 ㅗ 
 ㅜ 
 ㅓ 
 ㅡ 
 ㅢ 
 ㅖ 
 ㅒ 
 ㅑ 
 ㅛ 
 ㅠ 
 ㅕ 
 ㅟ 
 ㅞ 
 ㅙ 
 ㅘ 
 ㅝ 
 
 
 RR 
 i 
 e 
 oe 
 ae 
 a 
 o 
 u 
 eo 
 eu 
 ui 
 ye 
 yae 
 ya 
 yo 
 yu 
 yeo 
 wi 
 we 
 wae 
 wa 
 wo 
 
 
 IPA 
 i 
 e 
 ø 
 ɛ 
 a 
 o 
 u 
 ʌ 
 ɯ 
 ɰi 
 je 
 jɛ 
 ja 
 jo 
 ju 
 jʌ 
 ɥi 
 we 
 wɛ 
 wa 
 wʌ 
 
 
 Modern Korean is written with spaces between words , a feature not found in Chinese or Japanese. Korean punctuation marks are almost identical to Western ones. Traditionally, Korean was written in columns, from top to bottom, right to left, but is now usually written in rows, from left to right, top to bottom. 
 Differences between North Korean and South Korean  
 Main article: North–South differences in the Korean language 
 The Korean language used in the North and the South exhibits differences in pronunciation, spelling, grammar and vocabulary.  
 Pronunciation  
 In North Korea, palatalization of /si/ is optional, and /t͡ɕ/ can be pronounced  between vowels. 
 Words that are written the same way may be pronounced differently, such as the examples below. The pronunciations below are given in Revised Romanization , McCune–Reischauer and hangul, the last of which represents what the hangul would be if one were to write the word as pronounced. 
 
 
 Word 
 Meaning 
 Pronunciation 
 
 
 North (RR/MR) 
 North (Hangul) 
 South (RR/MR) 
 South (Hangul) 
 
 
 읽고 
 to read 
(continuative form) 
 il k o (il k o) 
 일코 
 il kk o (il kk o) 
 일꼬 
 
 
 압록강 
 Amnok River 
 am r okgang (am r okkang) 
 암록깡 
 am n okkang (am n okkang) 
 암녹깡 
 
 
 독립 
 independence 
 dong r ip (tong r ip) 
 동립 
 dong n ip (tong n ip) 
 동닙 
 
 
 관념 
 idea / sense / conception 
 gwa ll yeom (kwa ll yŏm) 
 괄렴 
 gwa nn yeom (kwa nn yŏm) 
 관념 
 
 
 혁신적* 
 innovative 
 hyeoksin jj eok (hyŏksin tch ŏk) 
 혁씬쩍 
 hyeoksin j eok (hyŏksin j ŏk) 
 혁씬적 
 
 
 * Similar pronunciation is used in the North whenever the hanja "的" is attached to a Sino-Korean word ending in ㄴ, ㅁ or ㅇ. (In the South, this rule only applies when it is attached to any single-character Sino-Korean word.) 
 Spelling  
 Some words are spelled differently by the North and the South, but the pronunciations are the same. 
 
 
 Word 
 Meaning 
 Pronunciation (RR/MR) 
 Remarks 
 
 
 North spelling 
 South spelling 
 
 
 해빛 
 햇빛 
 sunshine 
 haeppit (haepit) 
 The "sai siot" ('ㅅ' used for indicating sound change) is almost never written out in the North. 
 
 
 벗꽃 
 벚꽃 
 cherry blossom 
 beotkkot (pŏtkkot) 
 
 
 
 못읽다 
 못 읽다 
 cannot read 
 modikda (modikta) 
 Spacing. 
 
 
 한나산 
 한라산 
 Hallasan 
 hallasan (hallasan) 
 When a ㄴ-ㄴ combination is pronounced as ll , the original hangul spelling is kept in the North, while the hangul is changed in the South. 
 
 
 규률 
 규율 
 rules 
 gyuyul (kyuyul) 
 In words where the original hanja is spelt "렬" or "률" and follows a vowel, the initial ㄹ is not pronounced in the North, making the pronunciation identical with that in the South where the ㄹ is dropped in the spelling. 
 
 
 Spelling and pronunciation  
 Some words have different spellings and pronunciations in the North and the South, some of which were given in the "Phonology" section above: 
 
 
 Word 
 Meaning 
 Remarks 
 
 
 North spelling 
 North pronun. 
 South spelling 
 South pronun. 
 
 
 력량 
 ryeongryang (ryŏngryang) 
 역량 
 yeongnyang (yŏngnyang) 
 strength 
 Initial r' s are dropped if followed by i or y in the South Korean version of Korean. 
 
 
 로동 
 rodong (rodong) 
 노동 
 nodong (nodong) 
 work 
 Initial r' s are demoted to an n if not followed by i or y in the South Korean version of Korean. 
 
 
 원쑤 
 wonssu (wŏnssu) 
 원수 
 wonsu (wŏnsu) 
 mortal enemy 
 "Mortal enemy" and " field marshal " are homophones in the South. Possibly to avoid referring to Kim Il-sung , Kim Jong-il or Kim Jong-un as the enemy, the second syllable of "enemy" is written and pronounced 쑤 in the North.  
 
 
 라지오 
 rajio (rajio) 
 라디오 
 radio (radio) 
 radio 
 
 
 
 우 
 u (u) 
 위 
 wi (wi) 
 on; above 
 
 
 
 안해 
 anhae (anhae) 
 아내 
 anae (anae) 
 wife 
 
 
 
 꾸바 
 kkuba (kkuba) 
 쿠바 
 kuba (k'uba) 
 Cuba 
 When transcribing foreign words from languages that do not have contrasts between aspirated and unaspirated stops, North Koreans generally use tensed stops for the unaspirated ones while South Koreans use aspirated stops in both cases. 
 
 
 페 
 pe (p'e) 
 폐 
 pye (p'ye), pe (p'e) 
 lungs 
 In the case where ye comes after a consonant, such as in hye and pye , it is pronounced without the palatal approximate. North Korean orthography reflect this pronunciation nuance. 
 
 
 In general, when transcribing place names, North Korea tends to use the pronunciation in the original language more than South Korea, which often uses the pronunciation in English. For example: 
 
 
 Original name 
 North Korea transliteration 
 English name 
 South Korea transliteration 
 
 
 Spelling 
 Pronunciation 
 Spelling 
 Pronunciation 
 
 
 Ulaanbaatar 
 울란바따르 
 ullanbattareu (ullanbattarŭ) 
 Ulan Bator 
 울란바토르 
 ullanbatoreu (ullanbat'orŭ) 
 
 
 København 
 쾨뻰하븐 
 koeppenhabeun (k'oeppenhabŭn) 
 Copenhagen 
 코펜하겐 
 kopenhagen (k'op'enhagen) 
 
 
 al-Qāhirah 
 까히라 
 kkahira (kkahira) 
 Cairo 
 카이로 
 kairo (k'airo) 
 
 
 Grammar  
 Some grammatical constructions are also different: 
 
 
 Word 
 Meaning 
 Remarks 
 
 
 North spelling 
 North pronun. 
 South spelling 
 South pronun. 
 
 
 되였다 
 doeyeotda (toeyŏtta) 
 되었다 
 doeeotda (toeŏtta) 
 past tense of 되다 (doeda/toeda), "to become" 
 All similar grammar forms of verbs or adjectives that end in ㅣ in the stem (i.e. ㅣ, ㅐ, ㅔ, ㅚ, ㅟ and ㅢ) in the North use 여 instead of the South's 어. 
 
 
 고마와요 
 gomawayo (komawayo) 
 고마워요 
 gomawoyo (komawŏyo) 
 thanks 
 ㅂ-irregular verbs in the North use 와 (wa) for all those with a positive ending vowel; this only happens in the South if the verb stem has only one syllable. 
 
 
 할가요 
 halgayo (halkayo) 
 할까요 
 halkkayo (halkkayo) 
 Shall we do? 
 Although the hangul differ, the pronunciations are the same (i.e. with the tensed ㄲ sound). 
 
 
 Vocabulary  
 Some vocabulary is different between the North and the South: 
 
 
 Word 
 Meaning 
 Remarks 
 
 
 North spelling 
 North pronun. 
 South spelling 
 South pronun. 
 
 
 문화주택 
 munhwajutaek (munhwajut'aek) 
 아파트 
 apateu (ap'at'ŭ) 
 Apartment 
 아빠트 (appateu/appat'ŭ) is also used in the North. 
 
 
 조선말 
 joseonmal (chosŏnmal) 
 한국어 
 han-gugeo (han'gugŏ) 
 Korean language 
 한국말 is also used in the South 
 
 
 곽밥 
 gwakbap (kwakpap) 
 도시락 
 dosirak (tosirak) 
 lunch box 
 
 
 
 동무 
 dongmu (tongmu) 
 친구 
 chingu (ch'ingu) 
 Friend 
 동무 was originally a non-ideological word for "friend" used all over the Korean peninsula, but North Koreans later adopted it as the equivalent of the Communist term of address " comrade ". As a result, to South Koreans today the word has a heavy political tinge, and so they have shifted to using other words for friend like "친구".  
 
 
 Punctuation  
 In the North, guillemets 《 and 》 are the symbols used for quotes; in the South, quotation marks equivalent to the English ones, “ and ”, are standard, although 『 』 and 「 」 are also used. 
 Study by non-native learners  
 For native English speakers, Korean is generally considered to be one of the most difficult languages to master despite the relative ease of learning Hangul. For instance, the United States ' Defense Language Institute places Korean in Category IV, which also includes Arabic , Japanese , and Chinese . This means that 63 weeks of instruction (as compared to just 25 weeks for French , Spanish , Portuguese , and Italian ) are required to bring an English-speaking student to a limited working level of proficiency in which he or she has "sufficient capability to meet routine social demands and limited job requirements" and "can deal with concrete topics in past, present, and future tense."  
 The study of the Korean language in the United States is dominated by Korean American heritage language students ; they are estimated to form over 80% of all students of the language at non-military universities.  
 Korean is considerably easier for speakers of certain other languages, such as Japanese; in Japan, it is more widely studied by non-heritage learners.  
 Korean language tests  
 There are two widely used tests of Korean as a foreign language: the Korean Language Proficiency Test (KLPT) and the Test of Proficiency in Korean (TOPIK). The Korean Language Proficiency Test, an examination aimed at assessing non-native speakers' competence in Korean, was instituted in 1997; 17,000 people applied for the 2005 sitting of the examination.  
 The TOPIK test has three different difficulty levels: beginner, intermediate, and advanced; the difficulty level of the test taken determines the level achieved—the beginner test is levels 1 and 2; intermediate is levels 3 and 4; and advanced is levels 5 and 6. The TOPIK includes four sections: vocabulary/grammar (어휘및 문법), writing (쓰기), listening (듣기), and reading (읽기). The vocabulary/grammar section, listening section, and reading section each consist of 30 multiple choice questions worth a total of 100 points. The writing section consists of 10 multiple-choice questions worth 4 points each, and 4-6 written responses worth 60 points. The overall total score out of 400 is determined by adding up the 4 scores from each individual 100-point section. However, the level achieved is not simply a matter of achieving a minimum total score; the test-taker must achieve a minimum score in each section in addition to a minimum average total score. In order to achieve the lower of the two levels on each test (levels 1, 3, and 5), the test-taker must get at least 40 points in each of the four sections, and must get an average total score of 50 on the four sections. In order to achieve the higher of the two levels on each test (levels 2, 4, and 6), the test-taker must get at least 50 points in each of the four sections, and must get an average total score of 70 on the four sections. 
 See also  
 
 Hangul 
 Korean count word 
 Korean language and computers 
 Korean mixed script 
 Korean numerals 
 Korean particles 
 Korean phonology 
 Korean romanization 
 
 McCune–Reischauer 
 Revised romanization of Korean 
 SKATS 
 Yale romanization of Korean 
 
 
 Altaic languages 
 Hanja (ancient Chinese characters in Korean) 
 List of English words of Korean origin 
 List of Korea-related topics 
 Sino-Korean vocabulary 
 Vowel harmony 
 
 References  
 
 
 ^  "Världens 100 största språk 2010"  . Nationalencyklopedin . 2010 . Retrieved 12 February 2014 . &#160; (Swedish) 
 ^  a   b  Song, Jae Jung (2005) "The Korean language: structure, use and context" Routledge, p. 15 
Lyle Campbell &amp; Mauricio Mixco. 2007. A Glossary of Historical Linguistics . University of Utah Press. ("Korean, A language isolate", p. 90; "Korean is often said to belong with the Altaic hypothesis, often also with Japanese, though this is not widely supported", pp. 90–91; "...most specialists...no longer believe that the...Altaic groups...are related", p. 7) 
David Dalby. 1999/2000. The Linguasphere Register of the World's Languages and Speech Communities . Linguasphere Press. 
Nam-Kil Kim. 1992. "Korean", International Encyclopedia of Linguistics . Volume 2, pp. 282–86. ("...scholars have tried to establish genetic relationships between Korean and other languages and major language families, but with little success", p. 282) 
András Róna-Tas. 1998. "The Reconstruction of Proto-Turkic and the Genetic Question", The Turkic Languages . Routledge. pp. 67–80. (" have been heavily criticised in more recent studies, though the idea of a genetic relationship has not been totally abandoned", p. 77.) 
Claus Schönig. 2003. "Turko-Mongolic Relations", The Mongolic Languages . Routledge. pp. 403–19. ("...the 'Altaic' languages do not seem to share a common basic vocabulary of the type normally present in cases of genetic relationship", p. 403) 
 ^  Stratification in the peopling of China: how far does the linguistic evidence match genetics and archaeology? In; Sanchez-Mazas, Blench, Ross, Lin &amp; Pejros eds. Human migrations in continental East Asia and Taiwan: genetic, linguistic and archaeological evidence. 2008. Taylor &amp; Francis 
 ^  e.g. Miller 1971, 1996, Starostin et al. 2003 
 ^  e.g. Vovin 2008: 1 
 ^  Trask 1996: 147–51 
 ^  Rybatzki 2003: 57 
 ^  Vovin 2008: 5 
 ^  e.g. Martin 1966, 1990 
 ^  e.g. Miller 1971, 1996 
 ^  Starostin, Sergei (1991). Altaiskaya problema i proishozhdeniye yaponskogo yazika  . Moscow: Nauka. &#160; 
 ^  a   b  Lee &amp; Ramsey, 2000. The Korean language 
 ^  Vovin 2008 
 ^  Whitman 1985: 232, also found in Martin 1966: 233 
 ^  Vovin 2008: 211–12 
 ^  Source: Unescopress. "New interactive atlas adds two more endangered languages | United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization" . Unesco.org . Retrieved 2013-12-11 . &#160; 
 ^  David Lightfoot, 1999. The development of language: acquisition, change, and evolution 
 ^  Janhunen, Juha , 1996. Manchuria: an ethnic history 
 ^  only at the end of a syllable 
 ^  a   b   c   d  Sohn, Ho-Min (2006). Korean Language in Culture and Society . Boston: Twayne Publishers. ISBN &#160; 978-0-8248-2694-9 . &#160; 
 ^  Cho, Young A. “ Gender Differences in Korean Speech.” Korean Language in Culture and Society. Ed. Ho-min Sohn. University of Hawaii Press, 2006. pp. 189–98. 
 ^  Kim, Minju. “Cross Adoption of language between different genders: The case of the Korean kinship terms hyeng and enni.” Proceedings of the Fifth Berkley Woman and Language Conference. Berkeley: Berkeley Women and Language Group. 1999. 
 ^  Palley, Marian Lief. “Women’s Status in South Korea: Tradition and Change.” Asian Survey, Vol 30 No. 12. December 1990. pp. 1136–53. 
 ^  a   b   c  Sohn, Ho-Min. The Korean Language (Section 1.5.3 "Korean vocabulary", pp. 12–13), Cambridge University Press, 2001. ISBN 0-521-36943-6 . 
 ^  Kim, Jin-su (2009-09-11). "우리말 70%가 한자말? 일제가 왜곡한 거라네/Our language is 70% hanja? Japanese Empire distortion" . The Hankyoreh . Retrieved 2009-09-11 &#160; . The dictionary mentioned is 우리말　큰 사전 . Seoul: Hangeul Hakhoe. 1992. OCLC &#160; 27072560 &#160; 
 ^  Kanno, Hiroomi (ed.) / Society for Korean Linguistics in Japan (1987). Chōsengo o manabō (『朝鮮語を学ぼう』), Sanshūsha, Tokyo. ISBN 4-384-01506-2 
 ^  Sohn 2006 , p.&#160; 38 
 ^  Choe, Sang-hun (2006-08-30). "Koreas: Divided by a common language" . Retrieved 2012-08-16 . &#160; 
 ^  "Beliefs that bind" . Korea JoongAng Daily . 2007-10-23 . Retrieved 2012-08-16 . &#160; 
 ^  Raugh, Harold E. "The Origins of the Transformation of the Defense Language Program" . Applied Language Learning 16 (2): 1–12 . Retrieved 2008-01-09 . &#160; 
 ^  "Language Difficulty Ranking" . Effective Language Learning . Retrieved 2013-12-11 . &#160; 
 ^  Lee, Saekyun H.; HyunJoo Han. "Issues of Validity of SAT Subject Test Korea with Listening" . Applied Language Learning 17 (1): 33–56. Archived from the original on 2008-06-25. &#160; Cite uses deprecated parameters ( help ) 
 ^  "Global popularity of Korean language surges" . Korea Herald . 2012-07-22 . Retrieved 2012-08-16 . &#160; 
 ^  Fujita-Round, Sachiyo; John C. Maher (2007). Language Education Policy in Japan . "Language policy and political issues in education". Encyclopedia of Language and Education (United States: Springer). pp.&#160;393–404. ISBN &#160; 978-0-387-32875-1 . &#160; Cite uses deprecated parameters ( help ) 
 ^  "Korea Marks 558th Hangul Day" . The Chosun Ilbo . 2004-10-10. Archived from the original on 2008-02-19 . Retrieved 2008-01-09 . &#160; 
 ^  "Korean language test-takers pass 1 mil." . The Korea Times . Retrieved 25 January 2013 . &#160; 
 
 
 Further reading  
 
 Chang, Suk-jin (1996). Korean . Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company. ISBN &#160; 1-55619-728-4 . &#160; (Volume 4 of the London Oriental and African Language Library ). 
 Hulbert, Homer B. (1905): A Comparative Grammar of the Korean Language and the Dravidian Dialects in India . Seoul. 
 Lee, Ki-Moon Lee and S. Robert Ramsey. A History of the Korean Language (Cambridge University Press; 2011) 
 Martin, Samuel E. (1966): Lexical Evidence Relating Japanese to Korean. Language 42/2 : 185–251. 
 Martin, Samuel E. (1990): Morphological clues to the relationship of Japanese and Korean. In: Philip Baldi (ed.): Linguistic Change and Reconstruction Methodology . Trends in Linguistics: Studies and Monographs 45: 483–509. 
 Miller, Roy Andrew (1971): Japanese and the Other Altaic Languages . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-52719-0 . 
 Miller, Roy Andrew (1996): Languages and History: Japanese, Korean and Altaic . Oslo: Institute for Comparative Research in Human Culture. ISBN 974-8299-69-4 . 
 Ramstedt, G. J. (1928): Remarks on the Korean language. Mémoires de la Société Finno-Oigrienne 58. 
 Rybatzki, Volker (2003): Middle Mongol. In: Juha Janhunen (ed.) (2003): The Mongolic languages . London: Routledge. ISBN 0-7007-1133-3 : 47–82. 
 Starostin, Sergei A.; Anna V. Dybo; Oleg A. Mudrak (2003): Etymological Dictionary of the Altaic Languages , 3 volumes. Leiden: Brill Academic Publishers. ISBN 90-04-13153-1 . 
 Sohn, H.-M. (1999): The Korean Language . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Sohn, Ho-Min (2006). Korean Language in Culture and Society . Boston: Twayne Publishers. ISBN &#160; 978-0-8248-2694-9 . &#160; 
 Song, J.-J. (2005): The Korean Language: Structure, Use and Context . London: Routledge. 
 Trask, R. L. (1996): Historical linguistics . Hodder Arnold. 
 Vovin, Alexander: Koreo-Japonica . University of Hawai'i Press. 
 Whitman, John B. (1985): The Phonological Basis for the Comparison of Japanese and Korean . Unpublished Harvard University Ph.D. dissertation. 
 
 External links  
 
 
 
 Korean edition of Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 
 
 Look up Category:Korean language in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Korean 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikiversity has learning materials about Korean 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Korean language . 
 
 
 
 Korean Swadesh vocabulary list (from Wiktionary) 
 Linguistic and Philosophical Origins of the Korean Alphabet (Hangul) 
 Free Korean language and culture course online, in English 
 Korean Course - Free Korean language course online, in English 
 USA Foreign Service Institute Korean basic course 
 Linguistic map of Korea 
 Korean – a Category IV language Languages which are exceptionally difficult for native English speakers 
 dongsa.net A Korean verb conjugation tool that explains the conjugations for learners of Korean 
 무료 온라인 한국어-영어 번역 - Free Online Korean-English translation, in Korean 
 Korean phrasebook travel guide from Wikivoyage 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 t 
 e 
 
 
 Korean language 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 History 
 
 
 
 Old Korean 
 Middle Korean 
 Modern Korean 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dialects 
 
 
 
 Central
 
 Chungcheong 
 Seoul 
 
 
 Gyeongsang 
 Hamgyŏng 
 Hwanghae 
 Jeju 
 Jeolla 
 P'yŏng'an 
 Yeongdong 
 in China 
 in Russia (Koryo-mar) 
 in Japan (Zainichi) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grammar 
 
 
 
 Phonology 
 Count word 
 Honorifics 
 Numerals 
 Postpositions 
 Pronouns 
 Speech levels 
 Verbs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Literature 
 
 
 
 Gasa 
 Hyangga 
 Sijo 
 Yongbi Eocheonga 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Writing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Braille 
 Hangul 
 
 Consonant and vowel tables 
 Punctuation 
 
 
 Hanja 
 
 Gugyeol 
 Hyangchal 
 Idu 
 
 
 Mixed script 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cyrilli- and Romanization 
 
 
 
 
 ISO/TR 11941 
 Kontsevich 
 McCune-Reischauer 
 Revised 
 SKATS 
 Yale 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Other topics 
 
 
 
 International Circle of Korean Linguistics 
 Konglish 
 
 List of Konglish terms 
 
 
 List of English words of Korean origin 
 The National Institute of the Korean Language 
 North–South differences in the Korean language 
 Sino-Korean vocabulary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 t 
 e 
 
 
 List of primary language families 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Africa 
 
 
 
 Afroasiatic 
 Austronesian 
 Khoe 
 Kx'a 
 Niger–Congo 
 Nilo-Saharan ? 
 Tuu 
 Mande ? 
 Songhay ? 
 Ubangian ? 
 
 
 
 
 
 Isolates 
 
 
 
 
 Bangime 
 Hadza 
 Sandawe 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Europe and Asia 
 
 
 
 Afroasiatic 
 Ainu 
 Austroasiatic 
 Austronesian 
 Chukotko-Kamchatkan 
 Dené–Yeniseian 
 Dravidian 
 Eskimo–Aleut 
 Great Andamanese 
 Hmong–Mien 
 Hurro-Urartian 
 Indo-European 
 Japonic 
 Kartvelian 
 Koreanic 
 Mongolic 
 Northeast Caucasian 
 Northwest Caucasian 
 Ongan 
 Sino-Tibetan 
 Tai–Kadai 
 Tungusic 
 Turkic 
 Tyrsenian 
 Uralic 
 Yukaghir 
 Altaic ? 
 Austronesian–Ongan ? 
 Austro-Tai ? 
 Sino-Austronesian ? 
 Digaro ? 
 Kho-Bwa ? 
 Siangic ? 
 
 
 
 
 
 Isolates 
 
 
 
 
 Basque 
 Burushaski 
 Elamite 
 Hattic 
 Kusunda 
 Nihali 
 Nivkh 
 Sumerian 
 Hruso ? 
 Miji ? 
 Miju ? 
 Puroik ? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sign languages 
 
 
 
 
 British 
 French 
 German 
 Japanese 
 Swedish 
 Chinese 
 Indo-Pakistani 
 Arab 
 Other sign languages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 New Guinea 
and the Pacific 
 
 
 
 Amto–Musan 
 Arafundi 
 Austronesian 
 Baining 
 Border (Tami) 
 Bulaka River 
 Central Solomons 
 East Bird's Head – Sentani 
 East Geelvink Bay 
 Eastern Trans-Fly 
 Fas 
 Goilalan 
 Kiwai–Porome 
 Kwomtari 
 Lakes Plain 
 Left May 
 Lower Mamberamo 
 Mairasi 
 Mai Brat ? 
 Monumbo 
 Morehead and Upper Maro Rivers 
 Nimboran 
 North Bougainville 
 Pahoturi 
 Pauwasi 
 Piawi 
 Ramu–Lower Sepik 
 Senagi 
 Sepik 
 Skou 
 South Bougainville 
 Teberan 
 Tor–Kwerba 
 Torricelli 
 Trans–New Guinea 
 West Papuan 
 Yawa 
 Yuat 
 Trans-Fly–Bulaka River ? 
 Yele – West New Britain ? 
 
 
 
 
 
 Isolates 
 
 
 
 
 Abinomn 
 Busa 
 Kaure 
 Kol 
 Kuot 
 Pyu 
 Taiap 
 Yalë 
 Abun ? 
 Amberbaken ? 
 Dem ? 
 Hattam ? 
 Isirawa ? 
 Kapori ? 
 Kosare ? 
 Massep ? 
 Pawaia ? 
 Sulka ? 
 Waia ? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Australia 
 
 
 
 Arnhem 
 Bunuban 
 Daly (four families) 
 Darwin 
 Garawan 
 Iwaidjan 
 Jarrakan 
 Mirndi 
 Nyulnyulan 
 Pama–Nyungan 
 Tangkic 
 Tasmanian (4 families?) 
 Worrorran 
 Yangmanic (Wardaman) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Isolates 
 
 
 
 
 Giimbiyu 
 Marrgu 
 Tiwi 
 Wagiman 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 North America 
 
 
 
 Algic 
 Alsea 
 Caddoan 
 Chimakuan 
 Chinookan 
 Chumashan 
 Comecrudan 
 Coosan 
 Dené–Yeniseian 
 Eskimo–Aleut 
 Iroquoian 
 Kalapuyan 
 Keresan 
 Maiduan 
 Muskogean 
 Palaihnihan 
 Plateau Penutian 
 Pomoan 
 Salishan 
 Shastan 
 Siouan 
 Tanoan 
 Tsimshianic 
 Utian 
 Uto-Aztecan 
 Wakashan 
 Wintuan 
 Yokutsan 
 Yukian 
 Yuman–Cochimí 
 Hokan ? 
 Penutian ? 
 
 
 
 
 
 Isolates 
 
 
 
 
 Chimariko 
 Haida 
 Karuk 
 Kutenai 
 Siuslaw 
 Takelma 
 Timucua 
 Waikuri 
 Washo 
 Yana 
 Yuchi 
 Zuni 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mesoamerica 
 
 
 
 Chibchan 
 Jicaquean 
 Lencan ? 
 Mayan 
 Misumalpan 
 Mixe–Zoque 
 Oto-Manguean 
 Tequistlatecan 
 Totonacan 
 Uto-Aztecan 
 Xincan 
 Totozoquean ? 
 
 
 
 
 
 Isolates 
 
 
 
 
 Cuitlatec 
 Huave 
 Seri 
 Tarascan/Purépecha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 South America 
 
 
 
 Alacalufan 
 Arawakan 
 Arauan 
 Araucanian 
 Arutani–Sape 
 Aymaran 
 Barbacoan 
 Bororoan 
 Cahuapanan 
 Cariban 
 Catacaoan 
 Chapacuran 
 Charruan 
 Chibchan 
 Choco 
 Chonan 
 Guaicuruan 
 Guajiboan 
 Jê/Gê 
 Harakmbut – Katukinan 
 Jirajaran 
 Jivaroan 
 Kariri 
 Katembri–Taruma 
 Mascoian 
 Matacoan 
 Maxakalian 
 Nadahup 
 Nambikwaran 
 Otomákoan 
 Pano–Tacanan 
 Peba–Yaguan 
 Purian 
 Quechuan 
 Piaroa–Saliban 
 Ticuna–Yuri 
 Tiniguan 
 Tucanoan 
 Tupian 
 Uru–Chipaya 
 Witotoan 
 Yabutian 
 Yanomaman 
 Zamucoan 
 Zaparoan 
 Chimuan ? 
 Esmeralda–Yaruro ? 
 Hibito–Cholón ? 
 Lule–Vilela ? 
 Macro-Jê ? 
 Tequiraca–Canichana ? 
 
 
 
 
 
 Isolates (extant in 2000) 
 
 
 
 
 Aikanã ? 
 Andoque ? 
 Camsá 
 Candoshi 
 Chimane 
 Chiquitano 
 Cofán ? 
 Fulniô 
 Guató 
 Hodï/Joti 
 Irantxe ? 
 Itonama 
 Karajá 
 Krenak 
 Leco 
 Maku of Roraima 
 Movima 
 Mura-Pirahã 
 Nukak ? 
 Ofayé 
 Puinave 
 Rikbaktsa 
 Huaorani 
 Trumai 
 Urarina 
 Warao 
 Yamana 
 Yuracaré 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 See also 
 
 
 
 Language isolates 
 Unclassified languages 
 Creoles 
 Pidgins 
 Mixed languages 
 Artificial languages 
 List of sign languages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Families in bold are the largest. Families in italics have no living members. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Korea portal 
  Language portal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 								 
				Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Korean_language&amp;oldid=598789108 "				 
												 Categories : Languages with ISO 639-2 code Languages with ISO 639-1 code Korean writing system Korean language Agglutinative languages Buyeo languages Languages of China Languages of Japan Languages of Korea Languages of North Korea Languages of South Korea Languages of Canada Languages of the United States National symbols of Korea Subject–object–verb languages  Hidden categories: Articles with Swedish-language external links Pages containing cite templates with deprecated parameters Articles containing Korean-language text Articles containing explicitly cited English-language text Articles containing Chinese-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2007 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2008 Articles containing non-English-language text Commons category template with no category set Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata  												 
							 
		 
		 
			 Navigation menu 
			 
				 
	 Personal tools 
	 
 Create account Log in 	 
 
				 
					 
	 Namespaces 
	 
					 Article 
					 Talk 
			 
 
 
	 
		 
	 Variants 
	 
		 
					 
	 
 
				 
				 
					 
	 Views 
	 
					 Read 
					 Edit 
					 View history 
			 
 
 
	 Actions 
	 
		 
					 
	 
 
 
	 Search 
	 
					 
					 		 
	 
 
				 
			 
			 
					 
				 
	 Navigation 
	 
		 
			 Main page 
			 Contents 
			 Featured content 
			 Current events 
			 Random article 
			 Donate to Wikipedia 
			 Wikimedia Shop 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Interaction 
	 
		 
			 Help 
			 About Wikipedia 
			 Community portal 
			 Recent changes 
			 Contact page 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Tools 
	 
		 
			 What links here 
			 Related changes 
			 Upload file 
			 Special pages 
			 Permanent link 
			 Page information 
			 Data item 
 Cite this page 		 
	 
 
 
	 Print/export 
	 
		 
			 Create a book 
			 Download as PDF 
			 Printable version 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Languages 
	 
		 
			 Afrikaans 
			 አማርኛ 
			 العربية 
			 Aragonés 
			 Asturianu 
			 Avañe'ẽ 
			 Azərbaycanca 
			 বাংলা 
			 Bân-lâm-gú 
			 Беларуская 
			 Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ 
			 Bikol Central 
			 Български 
			 Brezhoneg 
			 Català 
			 Čeština 
			 Cymraeg 
			 Dansk 
			 Deutsch 
			 ދިވެހިބަސް 
			 Diné bizaad 
			 Eesti 
			 Ελληνικά 
			 Español 
			 Esperanto 
			 Euskara 
			 فارسی 
			 Fiji Hindi 
			 Føroyskt 
			 Français 
			 Frysk 
			 Gaeilge 
			 Galego 
			 贛語 
			 客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî 
			 한국어 
			 Հայերեն 
			 हिन्दी 
			 Hornjoserbsce 
			 Hrvatski 
			 Ido 
			 Ilokano 
			 Bahasa Indonesia 
			 Interlingua 
			 ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ/inuktitut 
			 Íslenska 
			 Italiano 
			 עברית 
			 Basa Jawa 
			 Kalaallisut 
			 ಕನ್ನಡ 
			 ქართული 
			 Kaszëbsczi 
			 Қазақша 
			 Kernowek 
			 Kiswahili 
			 Коми 
			 Kreyòl ayisyen 
			 Kurdî 
			 Лезги 
			 ລາວ 
			 Latina 
			 Latviešu 
			 Lietuvių 
			 Limburgs 
			 Magyar 
			 Македонски 
			 Māori 
			 मराठी 
			 მარგალური 
			 مازِرونی 
			 Bahasa Melayu 
			 Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ 
			 Монгол 
			 Nāhuatl 
			 Nederlands 
			 日本語 
			 Napulitano 
			 Нохчийн 
			 Norsk bokmål 
			 Norsk nynorsk 
			 Occitan 
			 Олык марий 
			 Oʻzbekcha 
			 ਪੰਜਾਬੀ 
			 پنجابی 
			 ភាសាខ្មែរ 
			 Piemontèis 
			 Plattdüütsch 
			 Polski 
			 Português 
			 Română 
			 Runa Simi 
			 Русский 
			 Саха тыла 
			 Sámegiella 
			 संस्कृतम् 
			 Scots 
			 Shqip 
			 සිංහල 
			 Simple English 
			 Slovenčina 
			 Slovenščina 
			 Ślůnski 
			 کوردی 
			 Српски / srpski 
			 Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски 
			 Basa Sunda 
			 Suomi 
			 Svenska 
			 Tagalog 
			 தமிழ் 
			 Татарча/tatarça 
			 ไทย 
			 ᏣᎳᎩ 
			 Türkçe 
			 Türkmençe 
			 Українська 
			 ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche 
			 Tiếng Việt 
			 Võro 
			 文言 
			 Winaray 
			 吴语 
			 ייִדיש 
			 粵語 
			 中文 
			 
			 Edit links 
		 
	 
 
			 
		 
		 
							 
											 This page was last modified on 9 March 2014 at 03:21. 
											 Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. 
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
									 
							 
											 Privacy policy 
											 About Wikipedia 
											 Disclaimers 
											 Contact Wikipedia 
											 Developers 
											 Mobile view