Latin - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 





 
 
		 
		 
		 
			 
			 
						 
						 Latin 
			 
								 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
								   (Redirected from Latin language ) 
												 
					Jump to:					 navigation , 					 search 
				 
				 For other uses, see Latins and Latin (disambiguation) . 
 "Roman language" redirects here. It is not to be confused with Romanesco language , Romanian language , or Romani language . 
 
 
 
  
 
 This article needs additional citations for verification . Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2013) 
 
 
 
 
 Latin 
 
 
 Lingua latina 
 
 
  
 Latin inscription in the Colosseum 
 
 
 
 Pronunciation 
  
 
 
 Native&#160;to 
 Latium , Roman Monarchy , Roman Republic , Roman Empire , Medieval and Early modern Europe , Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia (as lingua franca ) , Vatican City 
 
 
 Ethnicity 
 Latins 
 
 
 Era 
 Vulgar Latin developed into Romance languages , 6th to 9th centuries; the formal language continued as the scholarly lingua franca of Catholic countries medieval Europe and as the liturgical language of the Roman Catholic Church . 
 
 
 
 Language family 
 
 
 Indo-European 
 
 Italic 
 
 Latino-Faliscan 
 
 Latin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Writing system 
 
 Latin alphabet &#160; 
 
 
 Official status 
 
 
 
 Official language&#160;in 
 
 &#160;&#160; Vatican City 
 
 
 Regulated&#160;by 
 In antiquity, Roman schools of grammar and rhetoric.  Today, the Pontifical Academy for Latin . 
 
 
 Language codes 
 
 
 ISO 639-1 
 la 
 
 
 ISO 639-2 
 lat 
 
 
 ISO 639-3 
 lat 
 
 
 Linguasphere 
 51-AAB-a 
 
 
 
 Greatest extent of the Roman Empire, showing the area governed by Latin speakers. Many languages other than Latin, most notably Greek, were spoken within the empire. 
 
 
 
 
 Range of the Romance languages, the modern descendants of Latin, in Europe. 
 
 
 
 This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. 
 
 
 Latin (  i  /  ˈ  l  æ  t  ɨ  n  / ; Latin: lingua latīna , IPA:&#160;  
 Latin is still used in the creation of new words in modern languages of many different families, including English, and largely in biological taxonomy . Latin and its derivative Romance languages are the only surviving languages of the Italic language family . Other languages of the Italic branch were attested in the inscriptions of early Italy, but were assimilated to Latin during the Roman Republic . 
 The extensive use of elements from vernacular speech by the earliest authors and inscriptions of the Roman Republic make it clear that the original, unwritten language of the Roman Kingdom was an only partially deducible  
 Because of the Roman conquests , Latin spread to many Mediterranean and some northern European regions, and the dialects spoken in these areas, mixed to various degrees with the indigenous languages , developed into the modern Romance tongues .  Classical Latin slowly changed with the decline of the Roman Empire , as education and wealth became ever scarcer. The consequent Medieval Latin , influenced by various Germanic and proto-Romance languages until expurgated by Renaissance scholars, was used as the language of international communication, scholarship, and science until well into the 18th century, when it began to be supplanted by vernaculars . 
 Latin is a highly inflected language , with three distinct genders , seven noun cases , four verb conjugations , six tenses , three persons , three moods , two voices , two aspects , and two numbers . A dual number ("a pair of") is present in Old Latin . One of the rarer of the seven cases is the locative , only marked in proper place names and a few common nouns. Otherwise, the locative function ("place where") has merged with the ablative. The vocative , a case of direct address, is marked by an ending only in words of the second declension. Otherwise, the vocative has merged with the nominative, except that the particle O typically precedes any vocative, marked or not. 
 As a result of this case ambiguity, different authors list different numbers of cases: 5, 6, or 7. Adjectives and adverbs are compared, and the former are inflected according to case, gender, and number. In view of the fact that adjectives are often used for nouns, the two are termed substantives. Although Classical Latin has demonstrative pronouns indicating different degrees of proximity ("this one here", "that one there"), it does not have articles . Later Romance language articles developed from the demonstrative pronouns, e.g. le and la ( French ) from ille and illa , and su and sa ( Sardinian ) from ipse and ipsa . 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 
 
 1 Legacy 
 
 1.1 Inscriptions 
 1.2 Literature 
 1.3 Linguistics 
 1.4 Education 
 1.5 Official status 
 
 
 2 History of Latin 
 
 2.1 Archaic Latin 
 2.2 Classical Latin 
 2.3 Vulgar Latin 
 2.4 Medieval Latin 
 2.5 Renaissance Latin 
 2.6 Early modern Latin 
 2.7 Modern Latin 
 
 
 3 Phonology 
 
 3.1 Consonants 
 3.2 Vowels 
 
 
 4 Orthography 
 
 4.1 Alternate scripts 
 
 
 5 Grammar 
 
 5.1 Nouns 
 5.2 Verbs 
 
 
 6 Vocabulary 
 7 Example text 
 8 Phrases 
 9 Numbers 
 10 See also 
 11 Notes 
 12 References 
 13 External links 
 
 13.1 Language tools 
 13.2 Courses 
 13.3 Grammar and study 
 13.4 Phonetics 
 13.5 Latin language news and audio 
 13.6 Latin language online communities 
 
 
 
 
 
 Legacy  
 The Latin culture has been passed down through a number of broad genres. 
 Inscriptions  
 Some inscriptions have been published in an internationally agreed-upon, monumental, multi-volume series termed the " Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum (CIL)". Authors and publishers vary, but the format is approximately the same: volumes detailing inscriptions with a critical apparatus stating the provenance and relevant information. The reading and interpretation of these inscriptions is the subject matter of the field of epigraphy . There are approximately 270,000 known inscriptions. 
 Literature  
 The works of several hundred ancient authors who wrote in Latin have survived in whole or in part, in substantial works or in fragments to be analyzed in philology . They are in part the subject matter of the field of Classics . Their works were published in manuscript form before the invention of printing and now exist in carefully annotated printed editions such as the Loeb Classical Library , published by Harvard University Press , or the Oxford Classical Texts , published by Oxford University Press . 
 Latin translations of modern literature such as The Hobbit , Treasure Island , Robinson Crusoe , Paddington Bear , Winnie the Pooh , The Adventures of Tintin , Asterix , Harry Potter , Walter the Farting Dog , Le Petit Prince , Max und Moritz , How the Grinch Stole Christmas , The Cat in the Hat , and a book of fairy tales, "fabulae mirabiles," are intended to garner popular interest in the language. Additional resources include phrasebooks and resources for rendering everyday phrases and concepts into Latin, such as Meissner's Latin Phrasebook . 
 Linguistics  
 Latin has had a significant influence in the formation of English at all stages of its insular development. In the medieval period, much borrowing from Latin occurred through ecclesiastical usage established by Saint Augustine of Canterbury in the 6th century, or indirectly after the Norman Conquest through the Anglo-Norman language . From the 16th to the 18th centuries, English writers cobbled together huge numbers of new words from Latin and Greek words. These were dubbed inkhorn terms , as if they had spilled from a pot of ink. Many of these words were used once by the author and then forgotten. Some useful ones, though, survived, such as imbibe and extrapolate . Many of the most common polysyllabic English words are of Latin origin, through the medium of Old French . 
 Due to the influence of Roman governance and Roman technology on the less developed nations under Roman dominion, those nations adopted Latin phraseology in some specialized areas, such as science, technology, medicine, and law. For example, the Linnaean system of plant and animal classification was heavily influenced by Historia Naturalis , an encyclopedia of people, places, plants, animals, and things published by Pliny the Elder . Roman medicine, recorded in the works of such physicians as Galen , established that today's medical terminology would be primarily derived from Latin and Greek words, the Greek being filtered through the Latin. Roman engineering had the same effect on scientific terminology as a whole. Latin law principles have survived partly in a long list of legal Latin terms . 
 Many international auxiliary languages have been heavily influenced by Latin. Interlingua , which lays claim to a sizable following, is sometimes considered a simplified, modern version of the language. Latino sine Flexione , popular in the early 20th century, is Latin with its inflections stripped away, among other grammatical changes. 
 Education  
 
 
 
  
A multi-volume Latin dictionary in the University Library of Graz 
 
 
 Throughout European history, an education in the Classics was considered crucial for those who wished to join literate circles. Instruction in Latin is an essential aspect of Classics. In today's world, a large number of Latin students in America learn from Wheelock's Latin: The Classic Introductory Latin Course, Based on Ancient Authors . This book, first published in 1956,  was written by Frederic M. Wheelock , who received a PhD from Harvard University. Wheelock's Latin has become the standard text for many American introductory Latin courses. 
 The Living Latin movement attempts to teach Latin in the same way that living languages are taught, i.e., as a means of both spoken and written communication. It is available at the Vatican, and at some institutions in the U.S., such as the University of Kentucky and Iowa State University . The British Cambridge University Press is a major supplier of Latin textbooks for all levels, such as the Cambridge Latin Course series. It has also published a subseries of children's texts in Latin by Bell &amp; Forte, which recounts the adventures of a mouse called Minimus . 
 In the United Kingdom , the Classical Association encourages the study of antiquity through various means, such as publications and grants. The University of Cambridge ,  
 Official status  
 Latin has been an or the official language of European states 
 
 &#160; Poland - officially recognized and widely used  
 &#160; Holy See - used in the diocese with Italian being the official language of Vatican City 
 
 History of Latin  
 Main article: History of Latin 
 A number of historical phases of the language have been recognized, each distinguished by subtle differences in vocabulary, usage, spelling, morphology and syntax. There are no hard and fast rules of classification; different scholars emphasize different features. As a result, the list has variants, as well as alternative names. In addition to the historical phases, Ecclesiastical Latin refers to the styles used by the writers of the Roman Catholic Church , as well as by Protestant scholars, from Late Antiquity onward. 
 The generally recognized main phases under their most frequent names are introduced below. 
 Archaic Latin  
 Main article: Old Latin 
 The earliest known is Old Latin , which was spoken from the Roman Kingdom to the middle Republican period, and is attested both in inscriptions and in some of the earliest extant literary works, such as the comedies of Plautus and Terence . During this period, the Latin alphabet was devised from the Etruscan alphabet . The writing style later changed from an initial right-to-left or boustrophedon  
 Classical Latin  
 Main article: Classical Latin 
 During the late republic and into the first years of the empire, a new Classical Latin arose, a conscious creation of the orators, poets, historians and other literate men, who wrote the great works of classical literature , which were taught in grammar and rhetoric schools. Today's instructional grammars trace their roots to these schools , which served as a sort of informal language academy dedicated to maintaining and perpetuating educated speech.  
 Vulgar Latin  
 Main articles: Vulgar Latin and Late Latin 
 Philological analysis of Archaic Latin works, such as those of Plautus , which contain snippets of everyday speech, indicates that a spoken language, Vulgar Latin ( sermo vulgi ("the speech of the masses") by Cicero ), existed at the same time as the literate Classical Latin. This informal language was rarely written, so philologists have been left with only individual words and phrases cited by Classical authors, as well as those found as graffiti.  
 As vernacular Latin was free to develop on its own, there is no reason to suppose that the speech was uniform either diachronically or geographically. On the contrary, Romanized European populations developed their own dialects of the language.   The Decline of the Roman Empire meant a deterioration in educational standards that brought about Late Latin , a post-classical stage of the language seen in Christian writings of the time. This language was more in line with the everyday speech not only because of a decline in education, but also because of a desire to spread the word to the masses. 
 Despite dialect variation (which is found in any sufficiently widespread language) the languages of Spain, France, Portugal and Italy retained a remarkable unity in phonological forms and developments, bolstered by the stabilizing influence of their common Christian (Roman Catholic) culture. It was not until the Moorish conquest of Spain in 711 cut off communications between the major Romance regions that the languages began to diverge seriously.  The Vulgar Latin dialect that would later become Romanian diverged somewhat more from the other varieties due to its being largely cut off from the unifying influences in the western part of the Empire. 
 One way to determine whether a Romance language feature was in Vulgar Latin is to compare it with its parallel in Classical Latin. If it was not preferred in classical Latin, then it most likely came from the invisible contemporaneous vulgar Latin. For example, Romance "horse" (cavallo/cheval/caballo/cavalo) came from Latin caballus . However, classical Latin used equus . Caballus therefore was most likely the spoken form.  
 Vulgar Latin began to diverge into distinct languages by the 9th century at the latest, when the earliest extant Romance writings begin to appear. They were, throughout this period, confined to everyday speech, as, subsequent to Late Latin, Medieval Latin was used for writing. 
 Medieval Latin  
 Main article: Medieval Latin 
 
 
 
  
Latin Bible from 1407 
 
 
 Medieval Latin is the written Latin in use during that portion of the post-classical period when no corresponding Latin vernacular existed. The spoken language had developed into the various incipient Romance languages; however, in the educated and official world Latin continued without its natural spoken base. Moreover, this Latin spread into lands that had never spoken Latin, such as the Germanic and Slavic nations. It became useful for international communication between the member states of the Holy Roman Empire and its allies. 
 Without the institutions of the Roman empire that had supported its uniformity, medieval Latin lost its linguistic cohesion: for example, in classical Latin sum and eram are used as auxiliary verbs in the perfect and pluperfect passive, which are compound tenses. Medieval Latin might use fui and fueram instead.  
 Renaissance Latin  
 Main article: Renaissance Latin 
 
 
 
  
Most 15th century printed books ( incunabula ) were in Latin, with the vernacular languages playing only a secondary role.  
 
 
 The Renaissance briefly reinforced the position of Latin as a spoken language, through its adoption by the Renaissance Humanists . Often led by members of the clergy, they were shocked by the accelerated dismantling of the vestiges of the classical world and the rapid loss of its literature. They strove to preserve what they could. It was they who introduced the practice of producing revised editions of the literary works that remained by comparing surviving manuscripts, and they who attempted to restore Latin to what it had been. They corrected medieval Latin out of existence no later than the 15th century and replaced it with more formally correct versions supported by the scholars of the rising universities, who attempted, through scholarship, to discover what the classical language had been. 
 Early modern Latin  
 Main article: New Latin 
 During the Early Modern Age Latin still was the most important language of culture in Europe. Therefore, until the end of the 18th century the majority of books were written in Latin. 
 Modern Latin  
 Main article: Contemporary Latin 
 
 
 
  
The signs at Wallsend Metro station are in English and Latin as a tribute to Wallsend's role as one of the outposts of the Roman empire. 
 
 
 The largest organization that retains Latin in official and quasi-official contexts is the Catholic Church . Latin remains the language of the Roman Rite ; the Tridentine Mass is celebrated in Latin, and although the Mass of Paul VI is usually celebrated in the local vernacular language , it can be and often is said in Latin, in part or whole, especially at multilingual gatherings. Latin is the official language of the Holy See , the primary language of its public journal , the Acta Apostolicae Sedis , and the working language of the Roman Rota . The Vatican City is also home to the world's only ATM that gives instructions in Latin.  
 In the Anglican Church , after the publication of the Anglican Book of Common Prayer of 1559, a 1560 Latin edition was published for use at universities such as Oxford and the leading public schools, where the liturgy was still permitted to be conducted in Latin  
 Some films of ancient settings, such as Sebastiane and The Passion of the Christ , have been made with dialogue in Latin for the sake of realism. Occasionally, Latin dialogue is used because of its association with religion or philosophy, in such film/ TV series as The Exorcist and Lost (" Jughead "). Subtitles are usually shown for the benefit of those who do not understand Latin. There are also songs written with Latin lyrics . The libretto for the opera-oratorio Oedipus rex (opera) by Igor Stravinsky is in Latin. 
 Switzerland adopts the country's Latin short name " Helvetia " on coins and stamps, since there is no room to use all of the nation's four official languages. For a similar reason it adopted the international vehicle and internet code CH , which stands for Confoederatio Helvetica , the country's full Latin name. 
 
 
 
  
The polyglot European Union has adopted Latin names in the logos of some of its institutions for the sake of linguistic compromise and as a sign of the continent's heritage (e.g. the EU Council : Consilium ) 
 
 
 Many organizations today have Latin mottos, such as " Semper paratus " (always ready), the motto of the United States Coast Guard , and " Semper fidelis " (always faithful), the motto of the United States Marine Corps . Several of the states of the United States also have Latin mottos, such as " Montani semper liberi " (Mountaineers are always free), the state motto of West Virginia ; " Sic semper tyrannis " (Thus always for tyrants), that of Virginia ; "Qui transtulit sustinet" ("He who transplanted still sustains"), that of Connecticut ; " Esse quam videri " (To be rather than to seem), that of North Carolina ; "Si quaeris peninsulam amoenam, circumspice" ("If you seek a pleasant peninsula, look about you") that of Michigan . Another Latin motto is " Per ardua ad astra " (Through adversity/struggle to the stars), the motto of the RAF . Some schools adopt Latin mottos such as " Disce aut discede " of the Royal College, Colombo . Harvard University 's motto is " Veritas " meaning (truth). Veritas was the goddess of truth, a daughter of Saturn, and the mother of Virtue. 
 Similarly Canada's motto "A mari usque ad mare" (from sea to sea) and most provincial mottos are also in Latin (for example, British Columbia's is Splendor Sine Occasu (splendor without diminishment). 
 Occasionally, some media outlets broadcast in Latin, which is targeted at enthusiasts. Notable examples include Radio Bremen in Germany , YLE radio in Finland and Vatican Radio &amp; Television, all of which broadcast news segments and other material in Latin.  
 There are many websites and forums maintained in Latin by enthusiasts. The Latin Wikipedia has more than 100,000 articles written in Latin. 
 Latin is taught in many high schools, especially in Europe and the Americas. It is compulsory in British Public Schools and Grammar Schools , the Italian Liceo classico and Liceo scientifico , the German Humanistisches Gymnasium , the Dutch gymnasium , the Boston Latin School and Boston Latin Academy. In the pontifical universities postgraduate courses of Canon law are taught in Latin and papers should be written in the same language. 
 Phonology  
 Main article: Latin spelling and pronunciation 
 No inherited verbal knowledge of the ancient pronunciation of Latin exists. It must be reconstructed. Among the data used for reconstruction listed by Allen are explicit statements by ancient authors, especially grammarians, about the pronunciation of a word, puns, ancient etymologies, Latin words stated in other languages, and so forth.  
 As with any language, pronunciation varied according to historical period. There are several schools of pronunciation in use today. The main division is between the "classical" pronunciation, and "Ecclesiastical" pronunciation. Standard practice in Latin education is to teach the pronunciation of classical Latin first. Most Latinists know the opening words of De Bello Gallico , Gallia est omnis divisa in partes tres ... and know that divisa is nowadays most often pronounced as "diwisa". It makes little difference whether the refrain of Oh come all ye faithful is sung as "venite, venite" or "wenite, wenite", although the first is more appropriate to the period. Period differences are generally taught with the works of their authors; however, the classical pronunciation is always generally acceptable.  
 Consonants  
 The consonant phonemes of classical Latin are shown in the following table.  
 
 
 &#160; 
 Labial 
 Dental 
 Palatal 
 Velar 
 Glottal 
 
 
 plain 
 labial 
 
 
 Plosive 
 voiced 
 /b/ 
 /d/ 
 
 /ɡ/ 
 
 &#160; 
 
 
 voiceless 
 /p/ 
 /t/ 
 &#160; 
 /k/ 
 /kʷ/ 
 
 
 
 Fricative 
 voiced 
 &#160; 
 /z/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 voiceless 
 /f/ 
 /s/ 
 
 
 
 /h/ 
 
 
 Nasal 
 /m/ 
 /n/ 
 &#160; 
 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 
 
 Rhotic 
 
 /r/ 
 &#160; 
 
 &#160; 
 &#160; 
 
 
 Approximant 
 &#160; 
 /l/ 
 /j/ 
 
 /w/ 
 
 
 
 The period graphemes representing these phonemes are only a partial match to today's English alphabet, which, except for the capital letters, dates to the Middle Ages. Latin texts are nevertheless printed in it. The inscription from the Colosseum shown at the top of the article is a good example of the appearance of native Roman graphemes. Some notes concerning the mapping of Latin phonemes to English graphemes are given below. 
 
 
 Latin 
grapheme 
 Latin 
phone 
 Notes 
 
 
 〈 c 〉 
 /k/ 
 Never as in nice ; without aspiration , as in Italian peccare or English "sky" 
 
 
 〈 g 〉 
 /ɡ/ 
 Never as in germ 
 
 
 〈 g 〉 
 /ŋ/ 
 Before /n/, as in dignus /dɪŋnʊs/ 'worthy' 
 
 
 〈 l 〉 
 /l/ 
 Existed in two allophones : l exilis before /l/ and /i/, and l pinguis in all other positions, however the precise phonetic realisation of these allophones is uncertain.  
 
 
 〈 n 〉 
 /n/ 
 If /n/ occurs before /c/, /g/ or /x/,  
 
 
 〈 t 〉 
 /t/ 
 Never as in English nation . 
 
 
 〈 qu 〉 
 /kʷ/ 
 A labiovelar , considered one consonant. As such, it is possible for qu to be followed by a u , as in loquuntur /lokʷʊntʊr/ "they speak". 
 
 
 〈 u 〉 
 /w/ 
 This letter stood for both the consonant /w/ and the vowel /u/. 〈 u 〉 is /w/ at the beginning of a syllable. E.g., uehebantur /wɛheːˈbantʊr/ "they were driving", inuehebantur /inwɛheːˈbantʊr/ "they were attacking verbally", quattuor /kʷatːwɔr/ "four", which is disyllabic in verse.  
 
 
 〈 i 〉 
 /j/ 
 Also 〈 j 〉 . These are graphic variants. Like the previous, 〈 i 〉 stood for both consonant /j/ and vowel /i/: iucundus /juːkʊndʊs/ "pleasant", periucundus /pɛrjuːkʊndʊs/ "very pleasant".  
 
 
 〈 x 〉 
 /ks/ 
 A double consonant, considered two consonants. 
 
 
 Geminate (long) consonants are represented by doubled spelling: puella = /pʊˈɛlːa/ ("girl"; similar to Italian nella ), littera = /ˈlɪtːɛra/ ("letter", "character"; as in Italian petto ), accidere = /akːɪdɛrɛ/ ("to happen"; stress on the second syllable; as in Italian ecco ), addere = /ˈadːɛrɛ/ ("to add"), pessime = /ˈpɛsːimeː/ ("very/most badly") and the like. 
 It is also notable that consonants at the end of syllables close these syllables clearly; that means the latter are pronounced longer: e.g. amare = /aˈmaːrɛ/ ("to love") has the quantitative structure short-long-short , whereas armare = /arˈmaːrɛ/ ("to arm") shows long-long-short . This feature of classical Latin is crucial to the understanding and retracing of Latin poetical rhythms of classical and ensuing times , which are mainly based on syllable lengths, less on the word stresses. 
 Vowels  
 
 
 
 Front 
 Central 
 Back 
 
 
 Close 
 iː ɪ 
 
 ʊ uː 
 
 
 Mid 
 eː ɛ 
 
 ɔ oː 
 
 
 Open 
 
 a aː 
 
 
 
 
 Vowels: 
 
 
 〈 a 〉 = /a/ when short 〈 Ă 〉 , 〈 ă 〉 and /aː/ when long 〈 Ā 〉 , 〈 ā 〉 
 〈 e 〉 = /ɛ/ (as in pet ) when short 〈 Ĕ 〉 , 〈 ĕ 〉 and /eː/ (somewhat as in English they ) when long 〈 Ē 〉 , 〈 ē 〉 
 〈 i 〉 = /ɪ/ (as in pin ) when short 〈 Ĭ 〉 , 〈 ĭ 〉 and /iː/ (as in machine ) when long 〈 Ī 〉 , 〈 ī 〉 
 〈 o 〉 = /ɔ/ (as in British English law ) when short 〈 Ŏ 〉 , 〈 ŏ 〉 and /oː/ (somewhat as in holy ) when long 〈 Ō 〉 , 〈 ō 〉 
 〈 u 〉 = /ʊ/ (as in put ) when short 〈 Ŭ 〉 , 〈 ŭ 〉 and /uː/ (as in true ) when long 〈 Ū 〉 , 〈 ū 〉 . Also 〈 v 〉 . 
 〈 y 〉 = /y/ (as in French lune ), used for Latinized Greek loanwords , is always long 〈 Ȳ 〉 , 〈 ȳ 〉 
 
 In inscriptions, and in upper case in handwriting, the letter u, whether as a consonant or as a vowel, was invariably written as V. 
 Classical Latin distinguished between long and short vowels , and the use of the apex , which indicates long vowels, was quite widespread during classical and postclassical times (á, é, I, ó, ú). In modern texts, long vowels are often indicated by a macron 〈 ā, ē, ī, ō, ū 〉 , and short vowels are sometimes indicated by a breve 〈 ă, ĕ, ĭ, ŏ, ŭ 〉 . The vowel-length distinction began to fade by Late Latin. 
 A vowel followed by an 〈 m 〉 or 〈 n 〉 (maintained later by some Romance languages ), either at the end of a word ( 〈 m 〉 only) or before another consonant, is nasal , as in monstrum /mõːstrũː/ , and in many cases the consonant is not pronounced, as in French and Portuguese.  
 Orthography  
 
 
 
  
 
 This section needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2011) 
 
 
 Main article: Latin alphabet 
 
 
 
  
The Duenos Inscription , from the 6th century BC, is one of the earliest known Old Latin texts. 
 
 
 Latin was written in the Latin alphabet, derived from the Old Italic alphabet , which was in turn drawn from the Greek and ultimately the Phoenician alphabet .  This alphabet has continued to be used over the centuries as the script for the Romance, Celtic, Germanic, Baltic, Finnic, and many Slavic languages (Polish, Slovak, Slovene, Croatian and Czech), and has been adopted by many languages around the world, including Vietnamese , the Austronesian languages , many Turkic languages , and most languages in sub-Saharan Africa , the Americas , and Oceania , making it by far the world's single most widely-used writing system. 
 The number of letters in the Latin alphabet has varied. When it was first derived from the Etruscan alphabet, it contained only 21.  Although some Latin dictionaries use J it is for the most part not used for Latin text as it was not used in classical times, although many other languages use it. 
 Classical Latin did not contain sentence punctuation , letter case,  or interword spacing , though apices were sometimes used to distinguish length in vowels and the interpunct was used at times to separate words. So, a sentence originally written: 
 
 LV́GÉTEÓVENERÉSCVPIDINÉSQVE 
 
 or with interpunct as 
 
 LV́GÉTE·Ó·VENERÉS·CVPIDINÉSQVE 
 
 would be rendered in a modern edition as 
 
 Lugete, O Veneres Cupidinesque 
 
 or with macrons 
 
 Lūgēte, Ō Venerēs Cupīdinēsque. 
 
 and translated as 
 
 Mourn, O Venuses and Cupids . 
 
 
 
 
  
A replica of the Old Roman Cursive inspired by the Vindolanda tablets 
 
 
 The Roman cursive script is commonly found on the many wax tablets excavated at sites such as forts, an especially extensive set having been discovered at Vindolanda on Hadrian's Wall in Britain . Curiously enough, most of the Vindolanda tablets show spaces between words, though spaces were avoided in monumental inscriptions from that era. 
 Alternate scripts  
 Occasionally Latin has been written in other scripts: 
 
 The disputed Praeneste fibula is a 7th-century BC pin with an Old Latin inscription written using the Etruscan script. 
 The rear panel of the early eighth-century Franks Casket has an inscription that switches from Old English in Anglo-Saxon runes to Latin in Latin script and to Latin in runes. 
 
 Grammar  
 Main article: Latin grammar 
 Latin is a synthetic , fusional language , in the terminology of linguistic typology. In more traditional terminology, it is an inflected language, although the typologists are apt to say "inflecting". Thus words include an objective semantic element, and also markers specifying the grammatical use of the word. This fusion of root meaning and markers produces very compact sentence elements. For example, amō , "I love," is produced from a semantic element, ama- , "love," to which -ō , a first person singular marker, is suffixed. English requires two words to express the same meaning. 
 The grammatical function can be changed by changing the markers: the word is "inflected" to express different grammatical functions. The semantic element does not change. Inflection uses affixing and infixing. Affixing is prefixing and suffixing. Latin inflections are never prefixed. For example, amābit , "he or she will love", is formed from the same stem, amā- , to which a future tense marker, -bi- , is suffixed, and a third person singular marker, -t , is suffixed. There is an inherent ambiguity: -t may denote more than one grammatical category, in this case either masculine, feminine, or neuter gender. A major task in understanding Latin phrases and clauses is to clarify such ambiguities by an analysis of context. All natural languages contain ambiguities of one sort or another. 
 The inflections express gender , number , and case in adjectives , nouns , and pronouns —a process called declension . Markers are also attached to fixed stems of verbs, to denote person , number, tense , voice , mood , and aspect —a process called conjugation . Some words are uninflected, not undergoing either process, such as adverbs, prepositions, and interjections. 
 Nouns  
 Main article: Latin declension 
 There are seven Latin noun cases, which also apply to adjectives and pronouns. These mark a noun's syntactic role in the sentence by means of inflections, so word order is not as important in Latin as it is in other less inflected languages, such as English. The general structure and word order of a Latin sentence can therefore vary. The cases are as follows: 
 
 Nominative -- used when the noun is the subject or a predicate nominative . The thing or person acting; e.g., the girl ran: puella cucurrit, or cucurrit puella 
 Genitive -- used when the noun is the possessor of or connected with an object (e.g., "the horse of the man", or "the man's horse"—in both of these instances, the word man would be in the genitive case when translated into Latin). Also indicates the partitive , in which the material is quantified (e.g., "a group of people"; "a number of gifts"— people and gifts would be in the genitive case). Some nouns are genitive with special verbs and adjectives too (e.g., The cup is full of wine . Poculum plēnum vīnī est. The master of the slave had beaten him. Dominus servī eum verberāverat. ) 
 Dative -- used when the noun is the indirect object of the sentence, with special verbs, with certain prepositions, and if used as agent, reference, or even possessor. (e.g., The merchant hands the stola to the woman . Mercātor fēminae stolam trādit. ) 
 Accusative -- used when the noun is the direct object of the subject, and as object of a preposition demonstrating place to which. (e.g., The man killed the boy . Homō necāvit puerum . ) 
 Ablative -- used when the noun demonstrates separation or movement from a source, cause, agent , or instrument , or when the noun is used as the object of certain prepositions; adverbial. (e.g., You walked with the boy . cum puerō ambulāvistī. ) 
 Vocative -- used when the noun is used in a direct address. The vocative form of a noun is the same as the nominative except for second-declension nouns ending in -us . The -us becomes an -e or if it ends in -ius (such as fīlius ) then the ending is just -ī ( filī ) (as distinct from the nominative plural ( filiī )). (e.g., " Master !" shouted the slave. " Domine !" clāmāvit servus. ) 
 Locative -- used to indicate a location (corresponding to the English "in" or "at"). This is far less common than the other six cases of Latin nouns and usually applies to cities, small towns, and islands smaller than the island of Rhodes , along with a few common nouns, such as the word domus , house. In the first and second declension singular, its form coincides with the genitive ( Roma becomes Romae , "in Rome"). In the plural, and in the other declensions, it coincides with the ablative ( Athēnae becomes Athēnīs , "at Athens"). In the case of the fourth declension word domus , the locative form, domī ("at home") differs from the standard form of all the other cases. 
 
 Latin lacks definite and indefinite articles ; thus puer currit can mean either "the boy is running" or "a boy is running". Latin sometimes uses prepositions, and sometimes doesn't, depending on the type of ablative being used in a prepositional phrase. 
 Verbs  
 Main article: Latin conjugation 
 A regular verb in Latin belongs to one of four main conjugations . A conjugation is "a class of verbs with similar inflected forms."  The conjugations are identified by the last letter of the verb's present stem. The present stem can be found by taking the -re (or -ri, in the case of a deponent verb) ending off of the present infinitive. The infinitive of the first conjugation ends in -ā-re or -ā-ri (active and passive respectively); e.g., amāre , "to love," hortārī , "to exhort"; of the second conjugation by -ē-re or -ē-rī ; e.g., monēre , "to warn", verērī , "to fear;" of the third conjugation by -ere , -ī ; e.g., dūcere , "to lead," ūtī , "to use"; of the fourth by -ī-re , -ī-rī ; e.g., audīre , "to hear," experīrī , "to attempt". Irregular verbs may not follow these types, or may be marked in a different way. The "endings" presented above are not the suffixed infinitive markers. The first letter in each case is the last of the stem, because of which the conjugations are also called the a-conjugation, e-conjugation and i-conjugation. The fused infinitive ending is -re or -rī. Third-conjugation stems end in a consonant: the consonant conjugation. Further, there is a subset of the 3rd conjugation, the i-stems, which behave somewhat like the 4th conjugation, as they are both i-stems, one short and the other long. These stem categories descend from PIE , and can therefore be compared to similar conjugations in other IE languages. 
 There are six general tenses in Latin (present, imperfect, future, perfect, pluperfect, and future perfect), three grammatical moods (indicative, imperative and subjunctive, in addition to the infinitive , participle , gerund , gerundive and supine ), three persons (first, second, and third), two numbers (singular and plural), two voices (active and passive), and three aspects ( perfective, imperfective , and stative ). Verbs are described by four principal parts: 
 
 The first principal part is the first person singular, present tense, indicative mood, active voice form of the verb. If the verb is impersonal, the first principal part will be in the third person. If the verb is deponent, the first principal part will be in the passive voice. 
 The second principal part is the present infinitive active. The second principal part will be in the passive voice if the verb is deponent. 
 The third principal part is the first person singular, perfect indicative active form. The verb will be in the third person if the verb is impersonal. The verb will be passive if the verb is deponent. 
 The fourth principal part is the supine form, or alternatively, the nominative singular, perfect passive participle form of the verb. The fourth principal part can show either one gender of the participle, or all three genders ( -us for masculine, -a for feminine, and -um for neuter). The fourth principal part will be the future participle if the verb cannot be made passive. Most modern Latin dictionaries, if only showing one gender, tend to show the masculine; however, many older dictionaries will instead show the neuter, as this coincides with the supine. The fourth principal part is sometimes omitted for intransitive verbs, although strictly in Latin these can be made passive if used impersonally, and the supine exists for these verbs. 
 
 There are six tenses in the Latin language. These are divided into two tense systems: the present system, which is made up of the present, imperfect, and future tenses, and the perfect system, which is made up of the perfect, pluperfect, and future perfect tenses. Each tense has a set of endings corresponding to the person and number referred to. This means that subject (nominative) pronouns are generally unnecessary, unless emphasis on the subject is needed. 
 The graphic below displays the common inflected endings for the indicative mood in the active voice in all six tenses. 
 
 
 Tense 
 1st Person Singular 
 2nd Person Singular 
 3rd Person Singular 
 1st Person Plural 
 2nd Person Plural 
 3rd Person Plural 
 
 
 Present 
 -ō 
 -s 
 -t 
 -mus 
 -tis 
 -nt 
 
 
 Future 
 -bō, -am 
 -bis, -ēs 
 -bit, -et 
 -bimus, -ēmus 
 -bitis, -ētis 
 -bant, -ent 
 
 
 Imperfect 
 -bam 
 -bās 
 -bat 
 -bāmus 
 -bātis 
 -bant 
 
 
 Perfect 
 -ī 
 -istī 
 -it 
 -imus 
 -istis 
 -ērunt 
 
 
 Future Perfect 
 -erō 
 -eris 
 -erit 
 -erimus 
 -eritis 
 -erint 
 
 
 Pluperfect 
 -eram 
 -erās 
 -erat 
 -erāmus 
 -erātis 
 -erant 
 
 
 Vocabulary  
 As Latin is an Italic language, most of its vocabulary is likewise Italic, deriving ultimately from PIE . However, because of close cultural interaction, the Romans not only adapted the Etruscan alphabet to form the Latin alphabet, but also borrowed some Etruscan words into their language, including persona (mask) and histrio (actor).  Latin also included vocabulary borrowed from Oscan , another Italic language. 
 After the Fall of Tarentum (272 BC), the Romans began hellenizing, or adopting features of Greek culture, including the borrowing of Greek words, such as camera (vaulted roof), sumbolum (symbol), and balineum (bath).  
 Because of the Roman Empire’s expansion and subsequent trade with outlying European tribes, the Romans borrowed some northern and central European words, such as beber (beaver), of Germanic origin, and bracae (breeches), of Celtic origin.  The specific dialects of Latin across Latin-speaking regions of the former Roman Empire after its fall were influenced by languages specific to the regions. These spoken Latins evolved into particular Romance languages. 
 During and after the adoption of Christianity into Roman society, Christian vocabulary became a part of the language, formed either from Greek or Hebrew borrowings, or as Latin neologisms.  Continuing into the Middle Ages, Latin incorporated many more words from surrounding languages, including Old English and other Germanic languages . 
 Over the ages, Latin-speaking populations produced new adjectives, nouns, and verbs by affixing or compounding meaningful segments .  
 Example text  
 The beginning of the first book in Commentarii de Bello Gallico , also called De Bello Gallico , written by Gaius Julius Caesar : 
 Gallia est omnis divisa in partes tres, quarum unam incolunt Belgae, aliam Aquitani, tertiam qui ipsorum lingua Celtae, nostra Galli appellantur. Hi omnes lingua, institutis, legibus inter se differunt. Gallos ab Aquitanis Garumna flumen, a Belgis Matrona et Sequana dividit. Horum omnium fortissimi sunt Belgae, propterea quod a cultu atque humanitate provinciae longissime absunt, minimeque ad eos mercatores saepe commeant atque ea quae ad effeminandos animos pertinent important, proximique sunt Germanis, qui trans Rhenum incolunt, quibuscum continenter bellum gerunt. Qua de causa Helvetii quoque reliquos Gallos virtute praecedunt, quod fere cotidianis proeliis cum Germanis contendunt, cum aut suis finibus eos prohibent aut ipsi in eorum finibus bellum gerunt. Eorum una pars, quam Gallos obtinere dictum est, initium capit a flumine Rhodano, continetur Garumna flumine, Oceano, finibus Belgarum; attingit etiam ab Sequanis et Helvetiis flumen Rhenum; vergit ad septentriones. Belgae ab extremis Galliae finibus oriuntur; pertinent ad inferiorem partem fluminis Rheni; spectant in septentrionem et orientem solem. Aquitania a Garumna flumine ad Pyrenaeos montes et eam partem Oceani quae est ad Hispaniam pertinet; spectat inter occasum solis et septentriones. 
 Phrases  
 Here the phrases are mentioned with accents to know where to stress.  
 sálve to one person / salvéte to more than one person - hello 
 áve to one person / avéte to more than one person - greetings 
 vále to one person / valéte to more than one person - goodbye 
 cúra ut váleas - take care 
 exoptátus to male / exoptáta to female , optátus to male / optáta to female , grátus to male / gráta to female , accéptus to male / accépta to female - welcome 
 quómodo váles? , ut váles? - how are you? 
 béne - good 
 béne váleo - I'm fine 
 mále - bad 
 mále váleo - I'm not good 
 quáeso () - please 
 íta , íta est , íta véro , sic , sic est , étiam - yes 
 non - no 
 grátias tíbi , grátias tíbi ágo - thank you 
 mágnas grátias , mágnas grátias ágo - big thanks 
 máximas grátias , máximas grátias ágo , ingéntes grátias ágo - thank you very much 
 accípe sis to one person / accípite sítis to more than one person , libénter - you're welcome 
 qua aetáte es? - how old are you? 
 25 ánnos nátus to male / 25 ánnos náta to female - 25 years old 
 loquerísne ... - do you speak ... 
 
 Latíne? - Latin? 
 Gráece? () - Greek? 
 Ánglice? () - English? 
 Italiáne? - Italian? 
 Hispánice? - Spanish? 
 Theodísce? () - German? 
 Sínice? - Chinese? 
 Iapónice? () - Japanese? 
 Arábice? - Arabic? 
 Pérsice? - Persian? 
 Rússice? - Russian? 
 
 úbi latrína est? - where is the toilet? 
 ámo te / te ámo - I love you 
 Numbers  
 In ancient times, numbers in Latin were only written with letters. Today, the numbers can be written with the Arabic numbers and also the Roman numbers. The numbers 1, 2 and 3, and from 200 to 900, are declined as nouns and adjectives. 
 
 
 ūnus, ūna, ūnum (masculine, feminine, neuter) 
 
 I 
 
 one 
 
 
 duo, duae, duo (m., f., n.) 
 
 II 
 
 two 
 
 
 trēs, tria (m./f., n.) 
 
 III 
 
 three 
 
 
 quattuor 
 
 IIII or IV 
 
 four 
 
 
 quīnque 
 
 V 
 
 five 
 
 
 sex 
 
 VI 
 
 six 
 
 
 septem 
 
 VII 
 
 seven 
 
 
 octō 
 
 VIII 
 
 eight 
 
 
 novem 
 
 VIIII or IX 
 
 nine 
 
 
 decem 
 
 X 
 
 ten 
 
 
 See also  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Classical compound 
 Contemporary Latin 
 Greek and Latin roots in English 
 Hybrid word 
 Latin influence in English 
 Latin Mnemonics 
 Latin school 
 Lorem ipsum 
 Medical terminology 
 Romanization (cultural) 
 Toponymy 
 Wikipedia:IPA for Latin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Latin Wikipedia 
 Gregorian Chant 
 Tridentine Mass 
 
 
 
 
  
 Ancient Rome portal 
 
 
  
 Language portal 
 
 
  
 Catholicism portal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lists: 
 
 List of Greek words with English derivatives 
 List of Latin and Greek words commonly used in systematic names 
 List of Latin abbreviations 
 List of Latin phrases 
 List of Latin words with English derivatives 
 List of Latinised names 
 List of legal Latin terms 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Notes  
 
 
 ^  "Schools". Britannica (1911 ed.). &#160; 
 ^  Sandys, John Edwin (1910). A companion to Latin studies . Chicago: University of Chicago Press . pp.&#160;811–812. &#160; 
 ^  Hu, Winnie (6 October 2008). "A Dead Language That's Very Much Alive" . New York Times . &#160; 
 ^  Eskenazi, Mike (2 December 2000). "The New case for Latin" . TIME . &#160; 
 ^  Clark 1900 , pp.&#160;1–3 
 ^  Bryson, Bill (1996). The mother tongue: English and how it got that way . New York: Avon Books. pp.&#160;33–34. ISBN &#160; 0-14-014305-X . &#160; 
 ^  LaFleur, Richard A. (2011). "The Official Wheelock's Latin Series Website" . The Official Wheelock's Latin Series Website. &#160; 
 ^  University of Cambridge School Classics Project - Latin Course 
 ^  Open University Undergraduate Course - Reading classical Latin 
 ^  The Latin Programme – Via Facilis 
 ^  Beard, Mary (10 July 2006). "Does Latin "train the brain"?" . The Times Literary Supplement . Retrieved 20 December 2011 . "No, you learn Latin because of what was written in it – and because of the sexual side of life direct access that Latin gives you to a literary tradition that lies at the very heart (not just at the root) of Western culture." &#160; 
 ^  Who only knows Latin can go across the whole Poland from one side to the other one just like he was at his own home, just like he was born there. So great happiness! I wish a traveler in England could travel without knowing any other language than Latin!, Daniel Defoe, 1728 
 ^  Anatol Lieven, The Baltic Revolution: Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and the Path to Independence, Yale University Press, 1994, ISBN 0-300-06078-5 , Google Print, p.48 
 ^  Kevin O'Connor, Culture And Customs of the Baltic States, Greenwood Press, 2006, ISBN 0-313-33125-1 , Google Print, p.115 
 ^  Karin Friedrich et al., The Other Prussia: Royal Prussia, Poland and Liberty, 1569–1772, Cambridge University Press, 2000, ISBN 0-521-58335-7 , Google Print, p.88 
 ^  Karin Friedrich et al., The Other Prussia: Royal Prussia, Poland and Liberty, 1569–1772 , Cambridge University Press, 2000, ISBN 0-521-58335-7 , Google Print, p.88 
 ^  Diringer 1996 , pp.&#160;533–4 
 ^  Sacks, David (2003). Language Visible: Unraveling the Mystery of the Alphabet from A to Z . London: Broadway Books. p.&#160;80. ISBN &#160; 0-7679-1172-5 . &#160; 
 ^  Pope, Mildred K (1966). From Latin to modern French with especial consideration of Anglo-Norman; phonology and morphology . Publications of the University of Manchester, no. 229. French series, no. 6. Manchester: Manchester university press. p.&#160;3. &#160; 
 ^  Monroe, Paul (1902). Source book of the history of education for the Greek and Roman period . London, New York: Macmillan &amp; Co. pp.&#160;346–352. &#160; 
 ^  Herman &amp; Wright 2000 , pp.&#160;17–18 
 ^  Herman &amp; Wright 2000 , p.&#160;8 
 ^  Pei, Mario; compiled,,&#160;; Gaeng, arranged by Paul A. (1976). The story of Latin and the Romance languages (1st ed.). New York: Harper &amp; Row. pp.&#160;76–81. ISBN &#160; 0-06-013312-0 . &#160; Cite uses deprecated parameters ( help ) 
 ^  Herman &amp; Wright 2000 , pp.&#160;1–3 
 ^  a   b  Elabani, Moe (1998). Documents in medieval Latin . Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. pp.&#160;13–15. ISBN &#160; 0-472-08567-0 . &#160; 
 ^  "Incunabula Short Title Catalogue" . British Library . Retrieved 2 March 2011 . &#160; 
 ^  Moore, Malcolm (28 January 2007). "Pope's Latinist pronounces death of a language" . The Daily Telegraph . Retrieved 16 September 2009 . &#160; 
 ^  "Liber Precum Publicarum, The Book of Common Prayer in Latin (1560). Society of Archbishop Justus, resources, Book of Common Prayer, Latin, 1560. Retrieved 22 May 2012" . Justus.anglican.org . Retrieved 2012-08-09 . &#160; 
 ^  "Society of Archbishop Justus, resources, Book of Common Prayer, Latin, 1979. Retrieved 22 May 2012" . Justus.anglican.org . Retrieved 2012-08-09 . &#160; 
 ^  "Latein: Nuntii Latini mensis lunii 2010: Lateinischer Monats rückblick" (in Latin). Radio Bremen . Retrieved 16 July 2010 . &#160; 
 Dymond, Jonny (24 October 2006). "BBC NEWS | Europe | Finland makes Latin the King" . BBC Online . Retrieved 29 January 2011 . &#160; 
 "Nuntii Latini" (in Latin). YLE Radio 1 . Retrieved 17 July 2010 . &#160; 
 ^  Allen 2004 , pp.&#160;viii-ix 
 ^  Sihler, Andrew L. (1995). New Comparative Grammar of Greek and Latin . Oxford University Press. ISBN &#160; 978-0-19-508345-3 . Retrieved 12 March 2013 . &#160; 
 ^  Sihler 2008 , p.&#160;174. 
 ^  a   b  Lloyd, Paul M. (1987). From Latin to Spanish . Philadelphia: Diane Publishing. p.&#160;81. &#160; 
 ^  Allen 2004 , p.&#160;84 
 ^  Sihler 2008 , p.&#160;214 
 ^  Palmer 1984 , p.&#160;158. 
 ^  Buck 1904 , p.&#160;102. 
 ^  Sihler 2008 , p.&#160;182 
 ^  Baldi 2002 , p.&#160;292. 
 ^  Diringer 1996 , pp.&#160;451, 493, 530 
 ^  Diringer 1996 , p.&#160;536 
 ^  a   b   c  Diringer 1996 , p.&#160;538 
 ^  Diringer 1996 , p.&#160;540 
 ^  "Conjugation". Webster's II new college dictionary . Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 1999. &#160; 
 ^  a   b  Holmes &amp; Schultz 1938 , p.&#160;13 
 ^  Sacks, David (2003). Language Visible: Unraveling the Mystery of the Alphabet from A to Z . London: Broadway Books. p.&#160;351. ISBN &#160; 0-7679-1172-5 . &#160; 
 ^  a   b  Holmes &amp; Schultz 1938 , p.&#160;14 
 ^  Norberg, Dag; Johnson, Rand H, Translator (2004) . "Latin at the End of the Imperial Age" . Manuel pratique de latin médiéval . University of Michigan . Retrieved 14 July 2010 &#160; 
 ^  Jenks 1911 , pp.&#160;3, 46 
 ^  Jenks 1911 , pp.&#160;35, 40 
 ^  Ebbe Vilborg - Norstedts svensk-latinska ordbok - Second edition, 2009. 
 ^  a   b  Tore Janson - Latin - Kulturen, historien, språket - First edition, 2009. 
 
 
 References  
 
 
 Allen, William Sidney (2004). Vox Latina – a Guide to the Pronunciation of Classical Latin (2nd ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN &#160; 0-521-22049-1 . &#160; 
 
 
 Baldi, Philip (2002). The foundations of Latin . Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. &#160; 
 
 
 Bennett, Charles E. (1908). Latin Grammar . Chicago: Allyn and Bacon. ISBN &#160; 1-176-19706-1 . &#160; 
 
 
 Buck, Carl Darling (1904). A grammar of Oscan and Umbrian, with a collection of inscriptions and a glossary . Boston: Ginn &amp; Company. &#160; 
 
 
 Clark, Victor Selden (1900). Studies in the Latin of the Middle Ages and the Renaissance . Lancaster: The New Era Printing Company. &#160; 
 
 
 Diringer, David (1996) . The Alphabet – A Key to the History of Mankind . New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers Private Ltd. ISBN &#160; 81-215-0748-0 . &#160; 
 
 
 Herman, József; Wright, Roger (Translator) (2000). Vulgar Latin . University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press . ISBN &#160; 0-271-02000-8 . &#160; 
 
 
 Holmes, Urban Tigner; Schultz, Alexander Herman (1938). A History of the French Language . New York: Biblo-Moser. ISBN &#160; 0-8196-0191-8 . &#160; 
 
 
 Janson, Tore (2004). A Natural History of Latin . Oxford: Oxford University Press . ISBN &#160; 0-19-926309-4 . &#160; 
 
 
 Jenks, Paul Rockwell (1911). A Manual of Latin Word Formation for Secondary Schools . New York: D.C. Heath &amp; Co. &#160; 
 
 
 Palmer, Frank Robert (1984). Grammar (2nd ed.). Harmondsworth, Middlesex, England; New York, N.Y., U.S.A.: Penguin Books . ISBN &#160; 81-206-1306-6 . &#160; 
 
 
 Sihler, Andrew L (2008). New comparative grammar of Greek and Latin . New York: Oxford University Press. &#160; 
 
 
 Vincent, N. (1990). "Latin". In Harris, M.; Vincent, N. The Romance Languages . Oxford: Oxford University Press . ISBN &#160; 0-19-520829-3 . &#160; 
 
 
 Waquet, Françoise; Howe, John (Translator) (2003). Latin, or the Empire of a Sign: From the Sixteenth to the Twentieth Centuries . Verso. ISBN &#160; 1-85984-402-2 . &#160; 
 
 
 Wheelock, Frederic (2005). Latin: An Introduction (6th ed.). Collins. ISBN &#160; 0-06-078423-7 . &#160; 
 
 
 External links  
 
 
 
 Latin edition of Wikisource , the free library 
 
 
 
 
 
 Latin edition of Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Latin proverbs 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Latin 
 
 
 
 
 
 For a list of words relating to Latin, see the Latin language category of words in Wiktionary , the free dictionary. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Latin language . 
 
 
 Language tools  
 
 
 "Latin Dictionary Headword Search" . Perseus Hopper . Tufts University. &#160; Searches Lewis &amp; Short's A Latin Dictionary and Lewis's An Elementary Latin Dictionary . Online results. 
 "Latin Word Study Tool" . Perseus Hopper . Tufts University. &#160; Identifies the grammatical functions of words entered. Online results. 
 Aversa, Alan. "Latin Inflector" . University of Arizona. &#160; Identifies the grammatical functions of all the words in sentences entered, using Perseus. 
 "Latin Verb Conjugator" . Verbix. &#160; Displays complete conjugations of verbs entered in first-person present singular form. 
 Whittaker, William. "Words" . Notre Dame Archives. &#160; Identifies Latin words entered. Translates English words entered. 
 "Alpheios" . Alpheios Project. &#160; Combines Whittakers Words, Lewis and Short, Bennett's grammar and inflection tables in a browser addon. 
 Latin Dictionaries on the Open Directory Project 
 
 
 Dymock, John (1830). A new abridgment of Ainsworth's Dictionary, English and Latin, for the use of Grammar Schools (4th ed.). Glasgow: Hutchison &amp; Brookman. &#160; 
 
 
 Courses  
 
 
 Online Latin resources , Rosetta 
 Online resources for Latin , Nova Roma 
 Learn Latin Grammar, vocabulary and audio 
 Latin Links and Resources , Compiled by Fr. Gary Coulter 
 der Millner, Evan (2007). "Latinum" . Latin Latin Course on YouTube and audiobooks . Molendinarius . Retrieved 2 February 2012 . &#160; 
 Hatfield, Brent (2010). "Learn Latin Online Free" . Free online Latin course utilizing youtube videos and downloadable worksheets . Brent Hatfield . Retrieved 2 September 2010 . &#160; No longer active. 
 Cherryh, CJ (1999). "Latin 1:the Easy Way" . CJ Cherryh . Retrieved 24 June 2010 . &#160; 
 Byrne, Carol (1999). "Simplicissimus" . The Latin Mass Society of England and Wales . Retrieved 20 April 2011 . &#160; (a course in ecclesiastical Latin ). 
 Harsch, Ulrich (1996–2010). "Ludus Latinus Cursus linguae latinae" . Bibliotheca Augustiana (in Latin). Augsburg: University of Applied Sciences . Retrieved 24 June 2010 . &#160; Check date values in: |date= ( help ) 
 
 
 
 Beginners' Latin on http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/ 
 Latin Language for Beginners podcast 
 
 Grammar and study  
 
 
 Bennett, Charles E. (2005) . New Latin Grammar (2nd ed.). Project Gutenberg. ISBN &#160; 1-176-19706-1 . &#160; 
 
 
 Batzarov, Zdravko (2000). "Latin Language (Lingua Latina)" . Orbis Latinus . Retrieved 24 June 2010 . &#160; 
 
 
 Lehmann, Winifred P.; Slocum, Jonathan (2008). "Latin Online, Series Introduction" . The University of Texas at Austin . Retrieved 16 September 2009 . &#160; 
 
 
 Wilkinson, Hugh Everard (2010). "The World of Comparative and Historical Linguistics (A Historical Survey of the Romance Languages)" . Page ON Park . NTT Communications . Retrieved 24 June 2010 . &#160; 
 
 
 Phonetics  
 
 
 "Latin Pronunciation – a Beginner's Guide" . H2G2, BBC. 2001. &#160; 
 
 
 Cui, Ray (2005). "Phonetica Latinae-How to pronounce Latin" . Ray Cui . Retrieved 25 June 2010 . &#160; 
 
 
 Latin language news and audio  
 
 Ephemeris , online Latin newspaper 
  , Latin Language broadcast / audio downloads, from Finnish YLE Radio 1 
 News in Latin , Radio Bremen 
 Classics Podcasts in Latin and Ancient Greek , Haverford College 
 Latinum Latin Language course and Latin Language YouTube Index 
 
 Latin language online communities  
 
 Grex Latine Loquentium (Flock of those Speaking Latin) 
 Circulus Latinus Interretialis (Internet Latin Circle) 
 Latinum Schola 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 t 
 e 
 
 
 Ages of Latin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 until 75 BC 
 75 BC – 200 
 200–900 
 900–1300 
 1300–1500 
 1500–present 
 1900–present 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Old Latin 
 
 
 
 
 Classical Latin 
 
 
 
 
 Late Latin 
 
 
 
 
 Medieval Latin 
 
 
 
 
 Renaissance Latin 
 
 
 
 
 New Latin 
 
 
 
 
 Contemporary Latin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 History of Latin 
 Latin literature 
 Vulgar Latin 
 Ecclesiastical Latin 
 Romance languages 
 Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum 
 Hiberno-Latin 
 Judeo-Latin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 t 
 e 
 
 
 Ancient Rome topics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Outline 
 Timeline 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Epochs 
 
 
 
 Foundation 
 Monarchy 
 
 Revolution 
 
 
 Republic 
 Empire 
 
 Timeline , Pax Romana , Principate , Dominate , Decline , Fall 
 
 
 Western Empire / Eastern Empire 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Constitution 
 
 
 
 History 
 Kingdom 
 Republic 
 Empire 
 Late Empire 
 Senate 
 Legislative assemblies 
 
 Curiate 
 Century 
 Tribal 
 Plebeian 
 
 
 Executive magistrates 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Government 
 
 
 
 Curia 
 Forum 
 Cursus honorum 
 Collegiality 
 Emperor 
 Legatus 
 Dux 
 Officium 
 Praefectus 
 Vicarius 
 Vigintisexviri 
 Lictor 
 Magister militum 
 Imperator 
 Princeps senatus 
 Pontifex Maximus 
 Augustus 
 Caesar 
 Tetrarch 
 Optimates 
 Populares 
 Province 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Magistrates 
 
 
 
 
 Ordinary 
 
 
 
 Tribune 
 Quaestor 
 Aedile 
 Praetor 
 Consul 
 Censor 
 Promagistrate 
 Governor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Extraordinary 
 
 
 
 Dictator 
 Magister Equitum 
 Decemviri 
 Consular Tribune 
 Triumvir 
 Rex 
 Interrex 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Law 
 
 
 
 Twelve Tables 
 Mos maiorum 
 Citizenship 
 Auctoritas 
 Imperium 
 Status 
 Litigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Military 
 
 
 
 Borders 
 Establishment 
 Structure 
 Campaigns 
 Political control 
 Strategy 
 Engineering 
 Frontiers and fortifications 
 
 Castra 
 
 
 Technology 
 Army 
 
 Legion 
 Infantry tactics 
 Personal equipment 
 Siege engines 
 
 
 Navy 
 
 fleets 
 
 
 Auxiliaries 
 Decorations and punishments 
 Hippika gymnasia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Economy 
 
 
 
 Agriculture 
 Deforestation 
 Commerce 
 Finance 
 Currency 
 Republican currency 
 Imperial currency 
 SPQR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Technology 
 
 
 
 Abacus 
 Numerals 
 Civil engineering 
 Military engineering 
 Military technology 
 Aqueducts 
 Bridges 
 Circus 
 Concrete 
 Forum 
 Metallurgy 
 Roads 
 Sanitation 
 Thermae 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Culture 
 
 
 
 Architecture 
 Art 
 Bathing 
 Calendar 
 Clothing 
 Cosmetics 
 Cuisine 
 Hairstyles 
 Education 
 Literature 
 Music 
 Mythology 
 Religion 
 Romanization 
 Sexuality 
 Theatre 
 Wine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Society 
 
 
 
 Patricians 
 Plebs 
 Conflict of the Orders 
 Secessio plebis 
 Equestrian order 
 Gens 
 Tribes 
 Naming conventions 
 Women 
 Marriage 
 Adoption 
 Slavery 
 Bagaudae 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Language 
 (Latin) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 History 
 Alphabet 
 Romance languages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Versions 
 
 
 
 Old 
 Classical 
 Vulgar 
 Late 
 Medieval 
 Renaissance 
 New 
 Contemporary 
 Ecclesiastical 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Writers 
 
 
 
 Apuleius 
 Caesar 
 Catullus 
 Cicero 
 Ennius 
 Horace 
 Juvenal 
 Livy 
 Lucan 
 Lucretius 
 Martial 
 Ovid 
 Petronius 
 Plautus 
 Pliny the Elder 
 Pliny the Younger 
 Propertius 
 Quintilian 
 Sallust 
 Seneca 
 Statius 
 Suetonius 
 Tacitus 
 Terence 
 Tibullus 
 Varro 
 Virgil 
 Vitruvius 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lists 
 
 
 
 Wars 
 Battles 
 Generals 
 Legions 
 Emperors 
 Geographers 
 Institutions 
 Laws 
 Consuls 
 Distinguished women 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Major cities 
 
 
 
 Alexandria 
 Antioch 
 Aquileia 
 Bononia 
 Carthage 
 Constantinople 
 Leptis Magna 
 Londinium 
 Mediolanum 
 Pompeii 
 Ravenna 
 Rome 
 Smyrna 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Other topics 
 
 
 
 Fiction set in ancient Rome 
 
 films 
 video games 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Portal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  



 								 
				Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Latin&amp;oldid=598925944 "				 
												 Categories : Languages with ISO 639-2 code Languages with ISO 639-1 code Ancient languages Fusional languages Languages of Italy Languages of Vatican City Latin language Latino-Faliscan languages Subject–object–verb languages  Hidden categories: Pages containing cite templates with deprecated parameters Articles needing additional references from May 2013 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from July 2012 Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Articles including recorded pronunciations Articles containing Latin-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2013 All articles that may contain original research Articles that may contain original research from October 2012 Articles needing additional references from August 2011 Articles with Open Directory Project links CS1 errors: dates  												 
							 
		 
		 
			 Navigation menu 
			 
				 
	 Personal tools 
	 
 Create account Log in 	 
 
				 
					 
	 Namespaces 
	 
					 Article 
					 Talk 
			 
 
 
	 
		 
	 Variants 
	 
		 
					 
	 
 
				 
				 
					 
	 Views 
	 
					 Read 
					 Edit 
					 View history 
			 
 
 
	 Actions 
	 
		 
					 
	 
 
 
	 Search 
	 
					 
					 		 
	 
 
				 
			 
			 
					 
				 
	 Navigation 
	 
		 
			 Main page 
			 Contents 
			 Featured content 
			 Current events 
			 Random article 
			 Donate to Wikipedia 
			 Wikimedia Shop 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Interaction 
	 
		 
			 Help 
			 About Wikipedia 
			 Community portal 
			 Recent changes 
			 Contact page 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Tools 
	 
		 
			 What links here 
			 Related changes 
			 Upload file 
			 Special pages 
			 Permanent link 
			 Page information 
			 Data item 
 Cite this page 		 
	 
 
 
	 Print/export 
	 
		 
			 Create a book 
			 Download as PDF 
			 Printable version 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Languages 
	 
		 
			 Адыгэбзэ 
			 Afrikaans 
			 Alemannisch 
			 አማርኛ 
			 Ænglisc 
			 Аҧсшәа 
			 العربية 
			 Aragonés 
			 ܐܪܡܝܐ 
			 Arpetan 
			 Asturianu 
			 Avañe'ẽ 
			 Azərbaycanca 
			 Bamanankan 
			 বাংলা 
			 Bân-lâm-gú 
			 Башҡортса 
			 Беларуская 
			 Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ 
			 Bikol Central 
			 Български 
			 Boarisch 
			 བོད་ཡིག 
			 Bosanski 
			 Brezhoneg 
			 Буряад 
			 Català 
			 Чӑвашла 
			 Cebuano 
			 Čeština 
			 Chavacano de Zamboanga 
			 Chi-Chewa 
			 Corsu 
			 Cymraeg 
			 Dansk 
			 Deutsch 
			 Dolnoserbski 
			 Eesti 
			 Ελληνικά 
			 Emiliàn e rumagnòl 
			 Эрзянь 
			 Español 
			 Esperanto 
			 Estremeñu 
			 Euskara 
			 فارسی 
			 Fiji Hindi 
			 Føroyskt 
			 Français 
			 Frysk 
			 Furlan 
			 Gaeilge 
			 Gaelg 
			 Gagauz 
			 Gàidhlig 
			 Galego 
			 贛語 
			 𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺 
			 客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî 
			 Хальмг 
			 한국어 
			 Հայերեն 
			 हिन्दी 
			 Hornjoserbsce 
			 Hrvatski 
			 Ido 
			 Ilokano 
			 Bahasa Indonesia 
			 Interlingua 
			 Interlingue 
			 Ирон 
			 IsiZulu 
			 Íslenska 
			 Italiano 
			 עברית 
			 Basa Jawa 
			 Kalaallisut 
			 ಕನ್ನಡ 
			 Къарачай-малкъар 
			 ქართული 
			 Қазақша 
			 Kernowek 
			 Kinyarwanda 
			 Kiswahili 
			 Коми 
			 Kongo 
			 Kurdî 
			 Кырык мары 
			 Ladino 
			 Лакку 
			 Лезги 
			 ລາວ 
			 Latina 
			 Latviešu 
			 Lëtzebuergesch 
			 Lietuvių 
			 Ligure 
			 Limburgs 
			 Lingála 
			 Lumbaart 
			 Magyar 
			 Македонски 
			 Malagasy 
			 മലയാളം 
			 Malti 
			 मराठी 
			 مصرى 
			 مازِرونی 
			 Bahasa Melayu 
			 Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ 
			 Мокшень 
			 Монгол 
			 Nāhuatl 
			 Nederlands 
			 Nedersaksies 
			 नेपाली 
			 नेपाल भाषा 
			 日本語 
			 Napulitano 
			 Нохчийн 
			 Nordfriisk 
			 Norsk bokmål 
			 Norsk nynorsk 
			 Nouormand 
			 Novial 
			 Occitan 
			 Олык марий 
			 ଓଡ଼ିଆ 
			 Oʻzbekcha 
			 Pälzisch 
			 Pangasinan 
			 پنجابی 
			 Papiamentu 
			 پښتو 
			 Picard 
			 Piemontèis 
			 Tok Pisin 
			 Plattdüütsch 
			 Polski 
			 Português 
			 Qaraqalpaqsha 
			 Qırımtatarca 
			 Română 
			 Rumantsch 
			 Runa Simi 
			 Русиньскый 
			 Русский 
			 Саха тыла 
			 Sámegiella 
			 संस्कृतम् 
			 Sardu 
			 Scots 
			 Seeltersk 
			 Shqip 
			 Sicilianu 
			 Simple English 
			 Slovenčina 
			 Slovenščina 
			 Словѣньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟ 
			 Ślůnski 
			 Soomaaliga 
			 کوردی 
			 Српски / srpski 
			 Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски 
			 Basa Sunda 
			 Suomi 
			 Svenska 
			 Tagalog 
			 தமிழ் 
			 Татарча/tatarça 
			 తెలుగు 
			 ไทย 
			 Тоҷикӣ 
			 ᏣᎳᎩ 
			 Türkçe 
			 Türkmençe 
			 Удмурт 
			 Українська 
			 اردو 
			 ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche 
			 Vèneto 
			 Vepsän kel’ 
			 Tiếng Việt 
			 Võro 
			 Walon 
			 文言 
			 West-Vlams 
			 Winaray 
			 吴语 
			 ייִדיש 
			 Yorùbá 
			 粵語 
			 Zazaki 
			 Zeêuws 
			 Žemaitėška 
			 中文 
			 
			 Edit links 
		 
	 
 
			 
		 
		 
							 
											 This page was last modified on 10 March 2014 at 02:23. 
											 Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. 
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
									 
							 
											 Privacy policy 
											 About Wikipedia 
											 Disclaimers 
											 Contact Wikipedia 
											 Developers 
											 Mobile view