Lojban - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 





 
 
		 
		 
		 
			 
			 
						 
						 Lojban 
			 
								 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
								 
												 
					Jump to:					 navigation , 					 search 
				 
				 
 
 Lojban 
 
 
 la .lojban. 
 
 
  
 
 
 Pronunciation 
  
 
 
 Created&#160;by 
 Logical Language Group 
 
 
 Date 
 1987 
 
 
 Setting and usage 
 a logically engineered language for various usages 
 
 
 Purpose 
 
 constructed languages 
 
 engineered languages 
 
 logical languages 
 
 Lojban 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Writing system 
 
 Latin and others 
 
 
 Sources 
 Loglan 
 
 
 Language codes 
 
 
 ISO 639-2 
 jbo 
 
 
 ISO 639-3 
 jbo 
 
 
 This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. 
 
 
 Lojban (pronounced locally:&#160;  
 
 
 
 Contents 
 
 
 1 History 
 
 1.1 Literature and vocabulary development 
 1.2 Development of learning aids 
 1.3 Community development 
 1.4 Future goals 
 
 
 2 Grammar 
 
 2.1 Phonology and orthography 
 2.2 Morphology 
 2.3 Syntax and semantics 
 
 
 3 Samples 
 
 3.1 Common phrases 
 3.2 Some unique Lojbanic expressions 
 3.3 The North Wind and the Sun 
 3.4 Tongue twisters 
 3.5 A Lojbanic poem (audio) 
 
 
 4 Community 
 
 4.1 The Internet 
 4.2 The Logfest 
 4.3 Population 
 
 
 5 Comparison with other logical languages 
 
 5.1 Loglan 
 5.2 Lojsk 
 5.3 Voksigid 
 5.4 gua\spi 
 
 
 6 See also 
 7 References 
 8 External links 
 
 
 
 History  
 Lojban has a predecessor, Loglan , a language invented by James Cooke Brown in 1955 and developed by The Loglan Institute . Loglan was originally conceived as a means to examine the influence of language on the speaker's thought (an assumption known as the Sapir–Whorf hypothesis ). 
 As Brown started to claim his copyright  
 Following the publication of The Complete Lojban Language , it was expected that "the documented lexicon would be baselined, and the combination of lexicon and reference grammar would be frozen for a minimum of 5 years while language usage grew."  As scheduled, this period, which has officially been called the "freeze", expired in 2002. The speakers of Lojban are now free to construct new words and idioms, and decide where the language is heading. 
 Lojban still shares many of the characteristics of Loglan: 
 
 It has a grammar that is based on predicate logic , designed to express complex logical constructs precisely. 
 It has no irregularities or ambiguities in spelling and grammar (although word derivation relies on arbitrary variant forms). This gives rise to high intelligibility for computer parsing . 
 It is designed to be as culturally neutral as possible. 
 It allows highly systematic learning and use, compared to most natural languages. 
 It possesses an intricate system of indicators which effectively communicate contextual attitudes or emotions . 
 It does not have simplicity as a design criterion. 
 
 Literature and vocabulary development  
 Lojban can be an intellectual device for creative writing and is deemed to have many potential aspects yet to be discovered or explored. 
 
 Dan Parmenter: 
The removal of grammatical ambiguity from modification  Other areas of possible benefit are (surprisingly in a 'logical' language) emotional expression. Lojban has a fully developed set of metalinguistic and emotional attitude indicators that supplant much of the baggage of aspect and mood found in natural languages, but most clearly separate indicative statements from the emotional communication associated with those statements. This might lead to freer expression and consideration of ideas, since stating an idea can be distinguished from supporting that idea. The set of possible indicators is also large enough to provide specificity and clarity of emotions that is difficult in natural languages. 
 
John Cowan: 
There is a marker for "figurative speech" which would be used on "back stabber" and would signal "There is a culturally dependent construction here!" The intent is not that everything is instantly and perfectly comprehensible to someone who knows only the root words, but rather that non-root words are built up creatively from the roots. Thus "heart pain" would refer to the literal heart and literal pain; what would be ambiguous would be the exact connection between these two. Is the pain in the heart, because of the heart, or what? But "heart pain" would not be a valid tanru for "emotional pain", absent the figurative speech marker. 
 Computer Network Discussions on Loglan/Lojban and Linguistics: Lojban as seen by the linguistics and cognitive science community 20, 23 
 
 
 The language was built to attempt to remove some limits on human thought; these limits are not understood, so that the tendency is to try to remove restrictions whenever we find the language structure gets in our way. You definitely can talk nonsense in Lojban. 
 
Bob LeChevalier: 
In Lojban, a little grammar makes for a lot of semantic fun, since the grammar doesn't interfere with the semantic quibble you love.  Lojban offers a new world of thought. 
 Why Lojban? 
 
 Like most languages with few speakers, Lojban lacks much of an associated body of literature and its creative extensions have not been fully realized (the true potential of its attitudinal system, for example, is considered unlikely to be drawn out "until and unless we have children raised entirely in a multi-cultural Lojban-speaking environment"  ). Also such collective or encyclopedic sources of knowledge like the Lojban Wikipedia , which may help expand the language's lexical horizon, are not very developed. 
 Presently accessible Lojbanic writings are principally concentrated on the Lojban.org, though there exist independent Lojbanic blog/journal sites as well. The Lojban IRC (or its archive) has a gathering of Lojbanic expressions too, but its grammatical correctness is not always guaranteed. These available materials on the internet include both original works and translations of classic pieces in the field of natural languages, ranging from poetry , short story , novel , and academic writing . This has been paralleled with a chrestomathy project aiming to produce a collection of translated writings in order to show wide samplings of various language, hopefully longer than 10,000 words and with a variety of genres and styles  ( see also – External link: Literature ). Examples of works that are already available include: 
 
 Alice in Wonderland by the English author Lewis Carroll 
 One Thousand and One Nights 
 The Moon is a Harsh Mistress (Chapter 1) by the science fiction writer Robert A. Heinlein 
 The Prophet by the Lebanese-American writer Kahlil Gibran 
 The Little Things by the short story writer/poet Raymond Carver 
 The Man and the Snake by the short story writer/satirist Ambrose Bierce 
 The Book by the cosmic horror writer H. P. Lovecraft 
 The Book of Esther from the Bible 
 
 Other translation projects include: 
 
 Eaton Interface: a translation of the Helen Eaton concept list into Lojban. 
 Parliamentary Rules: Lojban terms for parliamentary actions . 
 Lojban Adventure: a Lojban version of the classic Colossal Cave text adventure game. 
 
 Compound words (lujvo) and borrowed words (fu'ivla) are continually increasing as the speakers find demands. The number of root words (gismu) and structure words (cmavo) are basically unchanging, but new inventions are to be accepted as experimental components. In fact, it has been noticed that particular inclination or disproportion exists in the available vocabulary. Cortesi  has pointed out the lack of certain terms for mathematics and geometry (although this demand may now be disputed as the current set of Lojban vocabulary does actually allow speakers to express such notions as steradian (stero), trigonometric tangent (tanjo), multiplicative inverse (fa'i), matrix transpose (re'a) among a number of other kinds of operators or metric units). Other instances which require speakers to construct noncanonical words: 
 
 There are only a few (almost non-existent) entries of African country names on the official list of root words while other country names (especially those with large populations of speakers of the six source languages) — which are changed less wilfully — are covered to a remarkable extent. 
 Such distinction as between palne (tray) and palta (plate) exist while no distinction between "illustration" and "photography" is made by the available set of gismu (that is, no exclusive root word for "photography" exists except the generic pixra (picture) ( see also – Grammar: Morphology: brivla: gismu ). 
 
 Development of learning aids  
 Apart from the actual practice of the language, some members of the community and LLG have been endeavoring to create various aids for the learners. The Complete Lojban Language ( CLL , also known as The Red Book , due to its colour, and The Codex Woldemar , after its author), the definitive word on all aspects of Lojban, is one of them, finalized in 1997. Some of the projects in varying stages of completeness are: 
 
 Phrasebook: Lojbanic Phrasebook Project, CVS/Wiki Lojban Phrasebook, Pocket Dictionary 
 Parser: Lojban Parser/Machine Grammar (by Robin Lee Powell), jbofi'e (by Richard Curnow), valfendi (by Pierre Abbat) 
 Database: jbovlaste (by Robin Lee Powell), Reference Database (by Matt Arnold on DabbleDB) 
 Others: Lojban/Logic book and webpage (by John Clifford), TLI Loglan Interface (by Steven Belknap and Bob LeChevalier) 
 
 
 ( see also – External link: Learning Courses/Resources ) 
 
 Community development  
 Currently, Lojban's learning resources available on the internet are available mainly to speakers of English, French, Spanish, Russian, Hebrew, and Esperanto, to varying degrees.  
 Disproportion in the community population is still noticeable. It is reasonably hoped among Lojbanists that more people from different cultural/linguistic backgrounds join the community in order to maintain and further complement the intended neutrality of the language. ( see also – Community ) 
 Future goals  
 While the initial aim of the Loglan project was to investigate the Sapir–Whorf hypothesis , the active Lojban community recognizes additional goals for the language to be attained in the future, including but not limited to: 
 
 Eliminating ambiguity in language 
 Use as an International Auxiliary Language 
 Use as an academic language, such as in science or philosophy 
 Use as an educational tool 
 Research in linguistics 
 Research in artificial intelligence and machine understanding 
 Improved human-computer communication, storage ontologies , and computer translation of natural language text 
 Improved human-human communication, due to the logical and unambiguous structure and greater means of expression 
 
 Note that these goals are not crucial to the Lojban community, most of whom simply want to enjoy communicating with each other in Lojban.  
 Grammar  
 Main article: Lojban grammar 
 Phonology and orthography  
 Lojban has 6 vowels and 17 consonants . Some of them have, apart from the preferred/standard sounds, permitted variants intended to cover dissimilitude in pronunciation by speakers of different linguistic backgrounds. 
 Stress normally falls on the penultimate syllable. 
 There are 16 diphthongs (and no triphthongs ). A distinction between diphthongs and monophthongs can be written by inserting a comma in the Latin alphabet. Vowel hiatus is also prevented by inserting an apostrophe, which usually indicates  , though there are other valid realizations. For those who have trouble pronouncing certain consonant clusters , there is the option of adding vowels between them ( epenthesis ), as long as they differ sufficiently from the phonological vowels and are pronounced as short as possible. The resulting additional syllables are not factored in the grammar, including for the purposes of stress determination. 
 Lojban is written almost entirely with lower-case letters; upper-case letters are used to mark stress in words that do not fit the normal rules of stress assignment, or when whitespace is omitted. 
 The letters in Lojban and their respective pronunciations are shown in the table below. The IPA symbols in parentheses indicate alternative pronunciations; preferred pronunciations have no parentheses. 
 
 
 
 Consonants 
 Auxiliary characters 
 
 
 IPA representation 
  
  
(  ) 
  
  
(  ) 
  
  
(  ) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
(  ) 
  
  
  
(  ) 
  
 . 
 
 
 Latin 
 b 
 c 
 d 
 f 
 g 
 j 
 k 
 l 
 m 
 n 
 p 
 r 
 s 
 t 
 v 
 x 
 z 
 ' 
 . 
 , 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vowels 
 
 
 IPA representation 
  
(  ) 
  
(  ) 
  
  
(  ) 
  
  
 
 
 Latin 
 a 
 e 
 i 
 o 
 u 
 y 
 
 
 
 
 ^  a   b   c   d  Sonorants /m n l r/ may be syllabic . 
 ^  There is no preferred sound for /r/ ; any rhotic sound is equally acceptable. 
 
 
 In principle, Lojban may be written in any orthographic system as long as it satisfies the required regularities and unambiguities. Some of the reasons for such elasticity would be as follows: 
 
 Lojban is defined by the phonemes rather than graphemes; as long as they are correctly rendered so as to maintain the Lojbanic audio-visual isomorphism , a representational system can be said to be an appropriate orthography of the language; 
 Lojban is meant to be as culturally neutral as possible, so it is never crucial or fundamental to claim that some particular orthography of some particular languages (e.g. the Latin alphabet) should be the dominant mode. 
 
 Some Lojbanists extend this principle to claim that even an original orthography of the language is to be sought.  
 This article uses the common Latin alphabet mode. 
 Morphology  
 Lojban has three word-classes : predicate words ( brivla ), structure words ( cmavo ), and name words ( cmevla ). Each of them has uniquely identifying properties, so that one can unambiguously recognize which word is of which part of speech in a string of the language. They may be further divided in sub-classes. There also exists a special fragmental form assigned to some predicate words and structure words, from which compound words ( lujvo ) may be created.  
 Syntax and semantics  
 The language's grammatical structures are "defined by a set of rules that have been tested to be unambiguous using computers", which is in effect called the "machine grammar".  Hence the characteristics of the standard syntactic (not semantic) constructs in Lojban: 
 
 each word has exactly one grammatical interpretation; 
 the words relate grammatically to each other in exactly one way. 
 
 Such standards, however, are to be attained with certain carefulness: 
 
 It is important to note that new Lojbanists will not be able to speak 'perfectly' when first learning Lojban. In fact, you may never speak perfectly in 'natural' Lojban conversation, even though you achieve fluency in the language. No English speaker always speaks textbook English in natural conversation; Lojban speakers will also make grammatical errors when talking quickly. Lojbanists will, however, be able to speak or write unambiguously if they are careful, which is difficult if not impossible with a natural language. 
 
Nick Nicholas and John Cowan. ' What Is Lojban? II.3 
 
 The computer-tested, unambiguous rules also include grammar for 'incomplete' sentences e.g. for narrative, quotational, or mathematical phrases. 
 Lojbanic expressions are modular; smaller constructs of words are assembled into larger phrases so that all incorporating pieces manifest as a possible grammatical unity. This mechanism allows for simple yet infinitely powerful phrasings; "a more complex phrase can be placed inside a simple structure, which in turn can be used in another instance of the complex phrase structure". 
 Its typology can be said to be basically subject–verb–object and subject–object–verb . However, it can practically be anything: 
 
 mi prami do (SVO) (I love you) 
 mi do prami (SOV) (By me, you are loved) 
 do se prami mi (OVS) (You are loved by me) 
 do mi se prami (OSV) (You, I love) 
 prami fa mi do (VSO) (Loved by me, you are) 
 prami do fa mi (VOS) (Love you, I do) 
 
 Such flexibility has to do with the language's intended capability to translate as many expressions of natural languages as possible, based on a unique positional case system. The meaning of the sentence {mi prami do} is determined by {prami} realizing, with its own predefined "place structure", a specific semantic relation between {mi} and {do}; when the positional relation between {mi} and {do} changes, the meaning of the sentence changes too. As shown above, Lojban has particular devices to preserve such semantic structure of words while altering their order. 
 As befits a logical language, there is a large assortment of logical connectives. Such conjunction words take different forms depending on what they connect, another reason why the (standard) Lojbanic expressions are typically precise and clear. 
 Multiple predicate words may be linked up together so as to narrow the semantic scope of the phrase. In skami pilno "computer user(s)", the modifying word skami narrows the sense of the modified word pilno to form a more specific concept (in which case the modifier may resemble English adverbs or adjectives). 
 
 English: Several small fires were burning in the house . 
 Lojban: so'i cmalu fagri puca'o jelca ne'i le zdani 
 Gloss: many small fire past-continuing burn inside the house (Translation after English) 
 
 One could go still further, adding a quite extreme example of its syntactical flexibility. 
 Lojban can easily "imitate" even Amerindian one-word sentences like this one: 
 
 Nuu-chah-nulth language : inikwihl'minik'isit 
 Lojban: zdane'ikemcmafagyso'ikemprununjelca (so-called lujvo or compound word mainly using the underlying rafsi or roots according to strict compositional rules) 
 Gloss: (about) house-inside type-of small fire multitude type-of past event type of burning 
 
 The Nuu-chah-nulth one-word sentence breaks down a bit differently as: 
 inkiw (fire/burn) -ihl (in-the-house) -'minik (plural) -'is (diminutive) -'it (past-tense) 
 which can be expressed in Lojban the same way: 
 
 Lojban: fagykemyzdanerso'icmapru 
 Gloss: fire-type-house-inside-many-small-past-event 
 
 Samples  
 Common phrases  
 
 
 Lojban 
 literal meaning 
 English 
 
 
 coi/co'o  &#160; coi/co'o &#160; ( help · info ) 
  
 hello/good-bye 
 
 
 pe'u  &#160; pe'u &#160; ( help · info ) 
  
 please 
 
 
 ki'e  &#160; ki'e &#160; ( help · info ) 
  
 thank you 
 
 
 .u'u  &#160; u'u &#160; ( help · info ) 
  
 I'm sorry 
 
 
 xu do se glibau/jbobau  &#160; xu do se glibau/jbobau &#160; ( help · info ) 
  you is-a-speaker-of-English/Lojban-language 
 Do you speak English/Lojban? 
 
 
 ti/ta/tu  &#160; ti/ta/tu &#160; ( help · info ) 
 this-here/that-here/that-there 
 this one/that one/that yonder 
 
 
 mi na jimpe  &#160; mi na jimpe &#160; ( help · info ) 
 I  understand 
 I don't understand 
 
 
 go'i  &#160; go'i &#160; ( help · info ) 
 the-last-sentence 
 yes/That's true 
 
 
 na go'i  &#160; na go'i &#160; ( help · info ) 
  the-last-sentence 
 no/That's false 
 
 
 la'u ma  &#160; la'u ma &#160; ( help · info ) 
 being-a-quantity-of what 
 How much/many? 
 
 
 ma jdima  &#160; ma jdima &#160; ( help · info ) 
 what is-the-price-of 
 What's the cost? 
 
 
 lo vimku'a ma zvati  &#160; lo vimku'a ma zvati &#160; ( help · info ) 
 toilet what-location is-at 
 Where's the toilet? 
 
 
 Some unique Lojbanic expressions  
 
 .oiro'o bu'onai pei 
 
Are you no longer in pain? 
 mi nelci ko 
I is-fond-of you- 
Make me be fond of you! 
 le cukta be'u ma zvati 
that-which-is-described-as book  is-at what 
I need the book! Where is it? 
 ko ga'inai nenri klama le mi zdani 
you- inside-type-of come that-which-is-described-as having-to-do-with-me house 
I would be honored if you would enter my residence. 
 le nanmu cu ninmu 
one-or-more-specific-things-that-I-describe-as "men" are women 
The man/men is a/are woman/women. 
 seri'agi mi jgari lei djacu gi mi jgari le kabri 
With-physical-effect I grasp the-mass-of water, I grasp the cup. 
I grasp water, since I grasp the cup. 
 
 The North Wind and the Sun  
 A translation of The North Wind and the Sun by Nick Nicholas, used in comparative IPA realizations.  
 
 la .berbif. joi la .sol. 
 
la .berbif. joi la .sol. puki darlu lejei ri jikau ra vlimau le drata kei 
 co'i lenu lo litru vi klama gi'e tagji dasni lo kamgla kosta .i lego'i cu tugni lenu le pamoi snada be lenu naldasri'a le litru le kosta du'o ru'a vlimau le drata .ibazibo la .berbif. cu rocrai brife .iku'i go ri vlimau brife gi le litru cu tagmau vaungau le kosta ra .ibaze'e la .berbif. .uu cu sisti lenu troci .ibabo la .sol. cu glare dirce .ibazibo le litru co'u dasni le kosta .iseki'ubo la .berbif. cu bilga lenu tugni ledu'u la .sol. vlimau 
 
 Tongue twisters  
 
 lo'u lu le la li'u le'u 
 le crisa srasu cu rirci crino 
 tisna fa la tsani le cnita tsina lo tinci tinsa 
 la .bab. zbasu loi bakyzbabu loi bakygrasu 
 mi na djuno le du'u klama fa makau la .makaus. makau makau makau 
 le jbijbejbo cu cpucpacpe le jbajbu le cpicpare 
 lo la .santas. santa'a santa 
 
 A Lojbanic poem (audio)  
 
  &#160; xekri je blanu nicte &#160; ( help · info ) 
 
 Community  
 
 
  
 This section requires expansion . (August 2007) 
 
 
 The Internet  
 The activities of Lojban speakers are mostly via the Internet : 
 
 Lojban.org : A user-maintained site, attempting to reflect a cross section of the Lojban community outside of the LLG. 
 Lojban IRC (irc.freenode.net #lojban): Based on the Freenode IRC network. One may use a web interface as an alternative to IRC clients. 
 Lojban Mailing List : A beginner-oriented means to talk/learn about the language. 
 jbovlaste : An official, dictionary editing interface created by Jay Kominek, updated by Robin Lee Powell. People can post new Lojbanic words with definitions and examples, or vote for such experimental words. 
 samxarmuj/The Lojban Moo: A multi-user virtual environment, similar to the old text adventure games. A guide is given here . 
 le jbopre pe lj's Journal : A communal Lojban blog. 
 lojban-valsi : A-word-a-day mailing list on the Yahoo! Groups. 
 jbotcan.org : A community in which people may practice their Lojban, ask questions, propose Lojban-related ideas, etc. 
 uikipedias : The Lojban Wikipedia, where discussions may be conversed in English. 
 
 The Logfest  
 Gatherings of Lojbanists have been organized in USA annually since as early as 1990, called Logfest. It is mostly informal, taking place on a weekend, with the only scheduled activity being the annual meeting of the LLG. Those who cannot be present may still be involved via IRC. Activities may be whatever the attendees want to do: Lojban conversation, lessons, technical discussions, or socializing. 
 Population  
 The total number of Lojban speakers is unknown. 
 According to Lojban.org,  places known to have concentration of Lojbanists are: 
 
 Australia, Israel, United States 
 
 As of August 2007  that some people from the following countries are interested in or enthusiasts of the language: 
 
 Argentina, Canada, China, Estonia, France, Germany, Ireland, Mexico, The Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Russia, Thailand, Ukraine, United Kingdom, Venezuela. 
 
 Below are some of the notable personalities who have contributed to the development of Lojban: 
 
 Bob LeChevalier (aka lojbab ): the founder and the President of the LLG.  
 Robin Lee Powell (aka camgusmis ): the Secretary/Treasurer of the LLG, webmaster of Lojban.org. He provides the machine and bandwidth from which the site is served. He has also written several Lojbanic materials including a novel-sized story, la nicte cadzu ( Night Walkers ). 
 Jorge Llambías (aka xorxes ): one of the most active Lojbanists, having done several translations. He is also a prominent figure on the mailing list, helping beginners with the language. 
 John Cowan (aka jcowan ): the author of The Complete Lojban Language . 
 Miles Forster (aka la selpa'i ): a German Lojbanist who wrote the song ca pa djedi  and made several large translations into Lojban. 
 Robin Turner: a British philosopher and linguist living in Turkey. He is the coauthor of Lojban For Beginners . 
 Nick Nicholas (aka nitcion ): an Australian linguist. He is the first fluent Lojban speaker (although he insists that he was the second; he is known to be excessively modest). He has done Lojbanic writing, including Lojban For Beginners coauthored by Robin Turner. 
 Matt Arnold (aka epkat ): has been contributing to the translation project and software development. 
 
 Comparison with other logical languages  
 Loglan  
 Loglan is now a generic term that refers both to James Cooke Brown 's Loglan , and all languages descended from it. Since the organization that Dr. Brown established, The Loglan Institute (TLI), still calls its language Loglan , it is necessary to state that this section refers specifically to the TLI language, instead of the entire family of languages. 
 The principal difference between Lojban and Loglan is one of lexicon. A Washington DC splinter group, which later formed The Logical Language Group, LLG, decided in 1986 to remake the entire vocabulary of Loglan in order to evade Dr. Brown's claim of copyright to the language. After a lengthy battle in court, his claim to copyright was ruled invalid. But by then, the new vocabulary was already cemented as a part of the new language, which was called Lojban: A realization of Loglan by its supporters. 
 The closed set of five-letter words was the first part of the vocabulary to be remade. The words for Lojban were made by the same principles as those for Loglan; that is, candidate forms were chosen according to how many sounds they had in common with their equivalent in some of the most commonly spoken languages on Earth, which was then multiplied by the number of speakers of the languages with which the words had letters in common. The difference with the Lojban remake of the root words was that the weighting was updated to reflect the actual numbers of speakers for the languages. This resulted in word forms that had fewer sounds taken from English, and more sounds taken from Chinese. For instance, the Loglan word norma is equivalent to the Lojban word cnano (cf. Chinese 常, pinyin cháng ), both meaning "normal". 
 Grammatical words were gradually added to Lojban as the grammatical description of the language was made. 
 Loglan and Lojban still have essentially the same grammars, and most of what is said in the Grammar section above holds true for Loglan as well. Most simple, declarative sentences could be translated word by word between the two languages; but the grammars differ in the details, and in their formal foundations. The grammar of Lojban is defined mostly in the language definition formalism Parsing Expression Grammar and YACC , with a few formal "pre-processing" rules. Loglan also has a machine grammar, but it is not definitive; it is based on a relatively small corpus of sentences that has remained unchanged through the decades, which takes precedence in case of a discrepancy. 
 There are also many differences in the terminology used in English to talk about the two languages. In his writings, Brown used many terms based on English, Latin and Greek, some of which were already established with a slightly different meaning. On the other hand, the Lojban camp freely borrowed grammatical terms from Lojban itself. For example, what linguists call roots or root words , Loglanists call primitives or prims , and Lojbanists call gismu . The lexeme of Loglan and selma'o of Lojban have nothing to do with the linguistic meaning of lexeme . It is a kind of part of speech , a subdivision of the set of grammatical words, or particles, which loglanists call little words and lojbanists cmavo . Loglan and Lojban have a grammatical construct called metaphor and tanru , respectively; this is not really a metaphor , but a kind of modifier-modificand relationship, similar to that of a noun adjunct and noun. A borrowed word in Loglan is simply called a borrowing ; but in English discussions of Lojban, the Lojban word fu'ivla is used. This is probably because in Lojban, unlike Loglan, a certain set of CV templates is reserved for borrowed words. 
 In the new phonology for Lojban, the consonant q and the vowel w were removed, and the consonant h was replaced by x . The consonant ' ( apostrophe ) was added with the value of  by some speakers.) A rigid phonotactical system was made for Lojban, but Loglan does not seem to have had such a system. 
 Lojsk  
 Lojsk was conceived by Ari Reyes, heavily influenced by Loglan, Lojban, Universal Networking Language (UNL), Esperanto , Visual Basic , Dutton's Speedwords , Ceqli and Gua\spi.  
 Voksigid  
 Voksigid ,  created by an Internet working group led by Bruce R. Gilson, attempts to construct a predicate language of a different type from those which had gone before. Its syntax was somewhat influenced by Japanese, and its vocabulary was based mostly on European language roots. Loglan and Lojban both use word order to mark the various places in the predication, but because remembering which position means which role in the predication might be beyond easy memorization for most people, Voksigid was designed in order to overcome this issue. It uses an extensive set of very semantically specific prepositions to mark the roles of verb arguments, instead of positional order as in Loglan and Lojban. 
 gua\spi  
 gua\spi is a descendent of Loglan but is tonal , developed by Jim Carter. Instead of structure words there are in Gua\spi six different tones. Predicates have only one syllable instead of two. Some of its characteristics, including tones, phonotactics, expressions for masses vs sets, non-existence of metalinguistic negation, etc., received criticism.  
 See also  
 
 Simplified Technical English 
 Case grammar 
 
 References  
 
 
 ^  New York Times, the. Questions Answered: Invented Languages 
 ^  Cowan, John. The Complete Lojban Language 13.11 
 ^  Why I like Lojban 
 ^  AI Newsletter corroborating from the Loglan side 
 ^  Johansen, Arnt Richard. Why I like Lojban (accessed August 2007) 
 ^  Lojban.org Official Baseline Statement 
 ^  Cowan, John. The Complete Lojban Language 13.16 
 ^  Lojban.org Official LLG Projects: Chrestomathy (accessed August 2007) 
 ^  Cortesi, David. Lack of Geometry 
 ^  Lojban.org Official LLG Projects (accessed August 2007) 
 ^  Lojban.org Word Lists (accessed August 2007) 
 ^  Kena. Vodka-Pomme: Considerations on writing: The case of lojban (accessed August 2007) 
 ^  Cowan, John Woldemar. The Complete Lojban Language: 4.1 (accessed August 2007) 
 ^  Nicholas, Nick, and John Cowan. What is Lojban?: 2.2 (accessed August 2007) 
 ^  Nicholas, Nick. John Cowan. What Is Lojban? II.3 
 ^  http://www.lojban.org/files/texts/northwind 
 ^  Lojban.org The Lojban Online Community . 2005 
 ^  Frappr.com Lojban (accessed August 2007) 
 ^  Lojban.org LLG Members (accessed August 2010) 
 ^  The song ca pa djedi (accessed February 2014) 
 ^  Bruce R. Gilson's Voksigid page 
 ^  John Cowan (2003) critique of Gua\spi 
 
 
 
 Notes 
 
 
 
 Goertzel, Ben : Potential Computational Linguistics Resources for Lojban. Self-published, March 6, 2005. 
 Speer, Rob; Havasi, Catherine: Meeting the Computer Halfway: Language Processing in the Artificial Language Lojban. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2004.  
 Lojban vs Loglan comparison 
 "Lojban with attitude!" . Lojban for Beginners . Retrieved 29 June 2005 . &#160; 
 
 
 External links  
 
 
 
 Lojban edition of Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikibooks has more on the topic of: Lojban 
 
 
 
 
 
 Look up Lojban in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Look up Category:Lojban language in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. 
 
 
 
 Lojban.org 
 Learning materials 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 t 
 e 
 
 
 Constructed languages (conlangs) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Types and concepts 
 
 
 
 Artistic language 
 Constructed script 
 Engineered language 
 Fictional language 
 International auxiliary language (IAL) 
 Language game 
 Musical language 
 Relexification 
 Universal language 
 Zonal language 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Conlangs 
 
 
 
 Afrihili 
 Atlantean 
 Balaibalan 
 Blissymbols 
 Brithenig 
 Damin 
 Dothraki 
 Enochian 
 Esperanto 
 Glosa 
 Idiom Neutral 
 Ido 
 Interlingua 
 Ithkuil ( Ilaksh ) 
 Kalaba-X 
 Kēlen 
 Klingon 
 Láadan 
 Languages of Middle-earth 
 Langue nouvelle (1765) 
 Lingua Franca Nova 
 Lingua Ignota 
 Loglan 
 Lojban 
 Na'vi 
 Nadsat 
 Nal Bino 
 Neo 
 Novial 
 Occidental 
 Quenya 
 Ro 
 Sambahsa 
 Sindarin 
 Slovianski 
 Solresol 
 Sona 
 Spokil 
 Talossan 
 Teonaht 
 Toki Pona 
 Tsolyáni 
 Uropi 
 Valyrian 
 Verdurian 
 Volapük 
 Wenedyk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Resources 
 
 
 
 Codes for constructed languages 
 Conlanger 
 Language Creation Conference 
 Language Creation Society 
 Zompist.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Portal 
 WikiProject 
 List of constructed languages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  



 								 
				Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lojban&amp;oldid=598256394 "				 
												 Categories : Languages with ISO 639-2 code 1987 introductions Vocabulary Engineered languages  Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2012 Articles with hAudio microformats Articles to be expanded from August 2007 All articles to be expanded Articles containing potentially dated statements from August 2007 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2012 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from March 2012 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from November 2011  												 
							 
		 
		 
			 Navigation menu 
			 
				 
	 Personal tools 
	 
 Create account Log in 	 
 
				 
					 
	 Namespaces 
	 
					 Article 
					 Talk 
			 
 
 
	 
		 
	 Variants 
	 
		 
					 
	 
 
				 
				 
					 
	 Views 
	 
					 Read 
					 Edit 
					 View history 
			 
 
 
	 Actions 
	 
		 
					 
	 
 
 
	 Search 
	 
					 
					 		 
	 
 
				 
			 
			 
					 
				 
	 Navigation 
	 
		 
			 Main page 
			 Contents 
			 Featured content 
			 Current events 
			 Random article 
			 Donate to Wikipedia 
			 Wikimedia Shop 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Interaction 
	 
		 
			 Help 
			 About Wikipedia 
			 Community portal 
			 Recent changes 
			 Contact page 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Tools 
	 
		 
			 What links here 
			 Related changes 
			 Upload file 
			 Special pages 
			 Permanent link 
			 Page information 
			 Data item 
 Cite this page 		 
	 
 
 
	 Print/export 
	 
		 
			 Create a book 
			 Download as PDF 
			 Printable version 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Languages 
	 
		 
			 አማርኛ 
			 العربية 
			 Aragonés 
			 Башҡортса 
			 Беларуская 
			 Brezhoneg 
			 Català 
			 Čeština 
			 Dansk 
			 Deutsch 
			 Eesti 
			 Español 
			 Esperanto 
			 Français 
			 Galego 
			 한국어 
			 Ido 
			 Interlingua 
			 Italiano 
			 עברית 
			 Коми 
			 Latina 
			 Lietuvių 
			 Lojban 
			 Magyar 
			 Malagasy 
			 Nederlands 
			 日本語 
			 Norsk bokmål 
			 Novial 
			 Occitan 
			 Олык марий 
			 پنجابی 
			 Polski 
			 Português 
			 Русский 
			 संस्कृतम् 
			 Seeltersk 
			 Shqip 
			 Simple English 
			 Српски / srpski 
			 Suomi 
			 Svenska 
			 தமிழ் 
			 Українська 
			 ייִדיש 
			 粵語 
			 中文 
			 
			 Edit links 
		 
	 
 
			 
		 
		 
							 
											 This page was last modified on 5 March 2014 at 14:10. 
											 Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. 
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
									 
							 
											 Privacy policy 
											 About Wikipedia 
											 Disclaimers 
											 Contact Wikipedia 
											 Developers 
											 Mobile view