Solresol - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 





 
 
		 
		 
		 
			 
			 
						 
						 Solresol 
			 
								 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
								 
												 
					Jump to:					 navigation , 					 search 
				 
				 
 
 Solresol 
 
 
  
 
 
 Created&#160;by 
 François Sudre 
 
 
 Date 
 1827 
 
 
 Purpose 
 
 constructed languages 
 
 musical language 
 
 Solresol 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sources 
 a priori 
 
 
 Language codes 
 
 
 ISO 639-3 
 None ( mis ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 This article includes a list of references , but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations . Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (April 2009) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 This article possibly contains original research . Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research may be removed. (March 2013) 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 This article needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2013) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Solresol is a constructed language devised by François Sudre , beginning in 1827. His major book on it, Langue musicale universelle , was published after his death in 1866,  though he had already been publicizing it for some years. Solresol enjoyed a brief spell of popularity, reaching its pinnacle with Boleslas Gajewski 's 1902 posthumous publication of Grammaire du Solresol . 
 The teaching of sign languages to the deaf was discouraged between 1880 and 1991 in France, contributing to Solresol's descent into obscurity. After a few years of popularity, Solresol nearly vanished in the face of more successful languages, such as Volapük and Esperanto . There is still a small community of Solresol enthusiasts scattered across the world, better able to communicate with one another now more than before thanks to the Internet . 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 
 
 1 Phonology 
 2 Vocabulary 
 3 Grammar 
 4 Further attributes 
 5 See also 
 6 References 
 7 External links 
 
 
 
 Phonology  
 
 
 
  
The seven conventional notes, colors, syllables, numerals, and glyphs used to convey solresol phonemes. 
 
 
 Solresol words are made up of from one to five syllables or notes . Each of these may be one of only seven basic phonemes , which may in turn be accented or lengthened. There is another phoneme, silence, which is used to separate words: words cannot be run together as they are in English. 
 The phonemes can be represented in a number of different ways – as the seven musical notes in an octave , as spoken syllables (based on solfège , a way of identifying musical notes ), with the seven colors of the rainbow, symbols, hand gestures etc. Thus, theoretically Solresol communication can be done through speaking, singing, flags of different color – even painting. 
 Vocabulary  
 As in Ro , the longer words are divided into categories of meaning, based on their first syllable , or note. Words beginning with 'sol' have meanings related to arts and sciences , or, if they begin with 'solsol', sickness and medicine (e.g. solresol, "language"; solsolredo, "migraine"). Like other constructed languages with a priori vocabulary, Solresol faces considerable problems in categorizing the real world around it sensibly. The last couple of syllables may be arbitrary, to capture distinctions such as "apple" vs "pear" which do not fit simple categories. 
 Feminine words are formed by accenting the last syllable, and plurals by lengthening it. 
 A unique feature of Solresol is that meanings are negated by reversing the syllables in words. For instance fala means good or tasty, and lafa means bad. It is unclear how this interacts with the way words are categorized by their first note, and is not true in all instances, such as young man, bachelor and of not being opposites. 
 
 The following table shows the words of up to two syllables: 
 
 
 First (below) and second (right) syllables 
 No second syllable 
 -do 
 -re 
 -mi 
 -fa 
 -sol 
 -la 
 -si 
 
 
 Do- 
 no, not, neither, nor 
 (past) 
 I, me 
 you  
 he 
 self, oneself 
 one, someone 
 other 
 
 
 Re- 
 and, as well as 
 my, mine 
 (pluperfect) 
 your, yours  
 his 
 our, ours 
 your, yours  
 their 
 
 
 Mi- 
 or, or even 
 for, in order to/that 
 who, which (rel pron), that (conj) 
 (future) 
 whose, of which 
 well (adv) 
 here/there is, behold 
 good evening/night 
 
 
 Fa- 
 to 
 what? 
 with, jointly 
 this, that 
 (conditional) 
 why, for what reason 
 good, tasty, delectable 
 much, very, extremely 
 
 
 Sol- 
 if 
 but 
 in, within 
 wrong, ill (adv) 
 because 
 (imperative) 
 perpetually, always, without end, without ceasing 
 thank, thanks 
 
 
 La- 
 the 
 nothing, no one, nobody 
 by 
 here, there 
 bad 
 never, at no time 
 (present participle) 
 of 
 
 
 Si- 
 yes, okay, gladly, agreed 
 the same (thing) 
 each, every 
 good morning/afternoon 
 little, scarcely 
 mister, sir* 
 young man, bachelor* 
 (passive participle) 
 
 
 * Feminine versions are formed by stressing the last syllable. 
 Grammar  
 Apart from stress and length, solresol words are not inflected. Word order is also rather strict. 
 Solresol marks feminine gender and plural number, by stressing or lengthening the last syllable a word: 
 
 resimire brother, resimiré sister 
 resimiree brothers, resimiréé sisters 
 
 This only affects the first word in a noun phrase . That is, it only affects a noun when the noun is alone, as above; any determiner ('the', 'my', etc.) will take the gender or number marking instead: 
 
 redo resimire my brother, redó resimire my sister 
 redoo resimire my brothers, redóó resimire my sisters 
 
 Parts of speech are derived from verbs by lengthening (or perhaps stressing; the description is not clear) one of the syllables: abstract noun (1st syllable), agent/doer (2nd syllable), adjective (penult), adverb (last syllable). For example, 
 
 midofa to prefer, miidofa preference, midoofa preferable, midofaa preferably 
 resolmila to continue, reesolmila continuation, resoolmila one who continues, resolmiila continual, resolmilaa continually 
 
 Questions are formed by inverted subject and verb. 
 The various tense-and-mood particles are the double syllables, as given in vocabulary above. In addition, passive verbs are formed with faremi between this particle and the verb. The subjunctive is formed with mire before the pronoun. The negative do only appears once in the clause, before the word it negates. 
 The word fasi before a noun or adjective is augmentative ; after it is superlative . Sifa is the opposite ( diminutive ): 
 
 fala good, fasi fala very good, fala fasi excellent, the best; sifa fala okay, fala sifa not very good (and similarly with lafa bad) 
 sisire wind, fasi sisire gale, sisire fasi cyclone; sifa sisire breeze, sisire sifa movement of air 
 
 Further attributes  
 
 impartial and relatively simple 
 integrated systems ( signs , colors, etc.) for most different handicapped people, immediately operative without special learning 
 gives fast learning success to illiterate people (only 7 syllables or signs or 10 letters to know and to recognize) 
 very simple but effective system to differentiate the function of the words in the sentences 
 
 See also  
 
 Solfege 
 Musical language 
 Tonic sol-fa 
 Voyage to Faremido 
 Sarus (language) 
 
 References  
 
 
 ^  http://www.ifost.org.au/~gregb/solresol/sudre-book.pdf 
 
 
 
 Umberto Eco . The Search for the Perfect Language . 1993. ISBN 0-631-20510-1 
 
 External links  
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Solresol . 
 
 
 
 Langmaker.com about Solresol 
 html-version of the text of the book of François Sudre edition from 1866, Gajewski's Grammar of Solresol , edition 1902, translated in different languages, dictionary of Solresol with more than 13.000 French equivalents in a MySQL data base, and different other texts on artificial languages ( Esperanto from 1897, Ido from 1908, Occidental from 1930, and soon, Universalglot , Jean Pirro , from 1868) 
 Omniglot on the various ways of writing Solresol 
 The Athanasius Kircher Society's blog entry on Solresol 
 Grammar of Solresol by Boleslas Gajewski 
 Solresol-English dictionary, 2600 words 
 Solresol-English/French Mini-Dictionary 
 Solresol text collection including full Solresol–French dictionary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 t 
 e 
 
 
 Constructed languages (conlangs) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Types and concepts 
 
 
 
 Artistic language 
 Constructed script 
 Engineered language 
 Fictional language 
 International auxiliary language (IAL) 
 Language game 
 Musical language 
 Relexification 
 Universal language 
 Zonal language 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Conlangs 
 
 
 
 Afrihili 
 Atlantean 
 Balaibalan 
 Blissymbols 
 Brithenig 
 Damin 
 Dothraki 
 Enochian 
 Esperanto 
 Glosa 
 Idiom Neutral 
 Ido 
 Interlingua 
 Ithkuil ( Ilaksh ) 
 Kalaba-X 
 Kēlen 
 Klingon 
 Láadan 
 Languages of Middle-earth 
 Langue nouvelle (1765) 
 Lingua Franca Nova 
 Lingua Ignota 
 Loglan 
 Lojban 
 Na'vi 
 Nadsat 
 Nal Bino 
 Neo 
 Novial 
 Occidental 
 Quenya 
 Ro 
 Sambahsa 
 Sindarin 
 Slovianski 
 Solresol 
 Sona 
 Spokil 
 Talossan 
 Teonaht 
 Toki Pona 
 Tsolyáni 
 Uropi 
 Valyrian 
 Verdurian 
 Volapük 
 Wenedyk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Resources 
 
 
 
 Codes for constructed languages 
 Conlanger 
 Language Creation Conference 
 Language Creation Society 
 Zompist.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Portal 
 WikiProject 
 List of constructed languages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 								 
				Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Solresol&amp;oldid=598159023 "				 
												 Categories : Conlangs without ISO 639-3 code Musical languages Constructed languages International auxiliary languages 1827 introductions  Hidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from April 2009 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles that may contain original research from March 2013 All articles that may contain original research Articles needing additional references from March 2013 All articles needing additional references Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata  												 
							 
		 
		 
			 Navigation menu 
			 
				 
	 Personal tools 
	 
 Create account Log in 	 
 
				 
					 
	 Namespaces 
	 
					 Article 
					 Talk 
			 
 
 
	 
		 
	 Variants 
	 
		 
					 
	 
 
				 
				 
					 
	 Views 
	 
					 Read 
					 Edit 
					 View history 
			 
 
 
	 Actions 
	 
		 
					 
	 
 
 
	 Search 
	 
					 
					 		 
	 
 
				 
			 
			 
					 
				 
	 Navigation 
	 
		 
			 Main page 
			 Contents 
			 Featured content 
			 Current events 
			 Random article 
			 Donate to Wikipedia 
			 Wikimedia Shop 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Interaction 
	 
		 
			 Help 
			 About Wikipedia 
			 Community portal 
			 Recent changes 
			 Contact page 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Tools 
	 
		 
			 What links here 
			 Related changes 
			 Upload file 
			 Special pages 
			 Permanent link 
			 Page information 
			 Data item 
 Cite this page 		 
	 
 
 
	 Print/export 
	 
		 
			 Create a book 
			 Download as PDF 
			 Printable version 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Languages 
	 
		 
			 Aragonés 
			 Беларуская 
			 Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ 
			 Català 
			 Čeština 
			 Deutsch 
			 Eesti 
			 Ελληνικά 
			 Español 
			 Esperanto 
			 Euskara 
			 Français 
			 한국어 
			 Interlingua 
			 Interlingue 
			 Italiano 
			 Latina 
			 Magyar 
			 Bahasa Melayu 
			 Nederlands 
			 日本語 
			 Norsk bokmål 
			 Novial 
			 Occitan 
			 Polski 
			 Português 
			 Русский 
			 Suomi 
			 Svenska 
			 Українська 
			 Volapük 
			 中文 
			 
			 Edit links 
		 
	 
 
			 
		 
		 
							 
											 This page was last modified on 4 March 2014 at 20:52. 
											 Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. 
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
									 
							 
											 Privacy policy 
											 About Wikipedia 
											 Disclaimers 
											 Contact Wikipedia 
											 Developers 
											 Mobile view