Swedish language - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 





 
 
		 
		 
		 
			 
			 
						 
						 Swedish language 
			 
								 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
								 
												 
					Jump to:					 navigation , 					 search 
				 
				 
 
 Swedish 
 
 
 svenska 
 
 
 Pronunciation 
  
 
 
 Native&#160;to 
 Sweden , Finland 
 
 
 
 Native speakers 
 
 8.5 million &#160;(2007)  
 
 
 
 Language family 
 
 
 Indo-European 
 
 Germanic 
 
 North Germanic 
 
 East Scandinavian
 
 Swedish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Early forms 
 
 
 Old Swedish 
 
 Modern Swedish 
 
 Swedish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Writing system 
 
 Latin ( Swedish alphabet ) 
 Swedish Braille 
 
 
 
 Signed form(s) 
 
 Tecknad svenska (falling out of use) 
 
 
 Official status 
 
 
 
 Official language&#160;in 
 
 &#160; Sweden 
 &#160; Finland 
 &#160; European Union 
 Nordic Council 
 
 
 Regulated&#160;by 
 Swedish Language Council (in Sweden) 
 Swedish Academy (in Sweden) 
 Research Institute for the Languages of Finland (in Finland) 
 
 
 Language codes 
 
 
 ISO 639-1 
 sv 
 
 
 ISO 639-2 
 swe 
 
 
 ISO 639-3 
 swe 
 
 
 Linguasphere 
 52-AAA-ck to -cw 
 
 
 
 Major Swedish-speaking areas 
 
 
 
 This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. 
 
 
 Swedish (  &#160; svenska &#160; ( help · info ) ) is a North Germanic language , spoken by approximately 8.7 million people (2007),  predominantly in Sweden and parts of Finland , where it has equal legal standing with Finnish . It is largely mutually intelligible with Norwegian and Danish (see Classification ). Along with the other North Germanic languages, Swedish is a descendant of Old Norse , the common language of the Germanic peoples living in Scandinavia during the Viking Era . It is currently the largest of the North Germanic languages by numbers of speakers. 
 Standard Swedish , used by most Swedes , is the national language that evolved from the Central Swedish dialects in the 19th century and was well established by the beginning of the 20th century. While distinct regional varieties descended from the older rural dialects still exist, the spoken and written language is uniform and standardized. Some dialects differ considerably from the standard language in grammar and vocabulary and are not always mutually intelligible with Standard Swedish .  even though they are well researched and their use is often encouraged by local authorities. 
 The standard word order is, as in most Germanic languages, V2 , which means that the finite verb appears in second position of a declarative main clause. Swedish morphology is similar to English; that is, words have comparatively few inflections . There are two genders , two grammatical cases , and a distinction between plural and singular . Older analyses posit the cases nominative and genitive and there are some remains of distinct accusative and dative forms as well. Adjectives are compared as in English, and are also inflected according to gender, number and definiteness. The definiteness of nouns is marked primarily through suffixes (endings), complemented with separate definite and indefinite articles . The prosody features both stress and in most dialects tonal qualities. The language has a comparatively large vowel inventory. Swedish is also notable for the voiceless dorso-palatal velar fricative , a highly variable consonant phoneme . 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 
 
 1 Classification 
 2 History 
 
 2.1 Old Norse 
 2.2 Old Swedish 
 2.3 Modern Swedish 
 2.4 Contemporary Swedish 
 2.5 Former language minorities 
 
 
 3 Geographic distribution 
 
 3.1 Official status 
 3.2 Regulatory bodies 
 
 
 4 Dialects 
 
 4.1 Standard Swedish 
 4.2 Finland Swedish 
 4.3 Immigrant variants 
 
 
 5 Phonology 
 6 Vocabulary 
 7 Writing system 
 8 Grammar 
 9 Sample 
 10 See also 
 11 Notes 
 12 References 
 
 12.1 Print sources 
 12.2 Web sources 
 
 
 13 Recommended reading 
 
 13.1 Language courses 
 13.2 Grammars 
 13.3 Dictionaries 
 
 
 14 External links 
 
 14.1 Grammars 
 14.2 Increase vocabulary 
 14.3 Dictionaries 
 
 
 
 
 
 Classification  
 Swedish is an Indo-European language belonging to the North Germanic branch of the Germanic languages . In the established classification, it belongs to the East Scandinavian languages together with Danish , separating it from the West Scandinavian languages , consisting of Faroese , Icelandic and Norwegian . However, more recent analyses divide the North Germanic languages into two groups: Insular Scandinavian , Faroese and Icelandic, and Continental Scandinavian , Danish, Norwegian and Swedish, based on mutual intelligibility due to heavy influence of East Scandinavian (particularly Danish) on Norwegian during the last millennium and divergence from both Faroese and Icelandic.  
 By many general criteria of mutual intelligibility, the Continental Scandinavian languages could very well be considered dialects of a common Scandinavian language. However, because of several hundred years of sometimes quite intense rivalry between Denmark and Sweden, including a long series of wars in the 16th and 17th centuries, and the nationalist ideas that emerged during the late 19th and early 20th centuries, the languages have separate orthographies , dictionaries, grammars, and regulatory bodies. Danish, Norwegian, and Swedish are thus from a linguistic perspective more accurately described as a dialect continuum of Scandinavian (North Germanic), and some of the dialects, such as those on the border between Norway and Sweden, especially parts of Bohuslän , Dalsland , western Värmland , western Dalarna , Härjedalen , Jämtland and Scania , could be described as intermediate dialects of the national standard languages.  
 History  
 Main article: History of Swedish 
 In the 9th century, Old Norse began to diverge into Old West Norse (Norway and Iceland) and Old East Norse (Sweden and Denmark). In the 12th century, the dialects of Denmark and Sweden began to diverge, becoming Old Danish and Old Swedish in the 13th century. All were heavily influenced by Middle Low German during the Middle Ages . 
 Old Norse  
 Main article: Old Norse 
 
 
 
  
The approximate extent of Old Norse and related languages in the early 10th century:
 &#160; &#160; Old West Norse dialect 
 &#160; &#160; Old East Norse dialect 
 &#160; &#160; Old Gutnish 
 &#160; &#160; Old English 
 &#160; &#160; Crimean Gothic 
 &#160; &#160; Other Germanic languages with which Old Norse still retained some mutual intelligibility 
 
 
 
 In the 8th century, the common Germanic language of Scandinavia , Proto-Norse , had undergone some changes and evolved into Old Norse. This language began to undergo new changes that did not spread to all of Scandinavia, which resulted in the appearance of two similar dialects, Old West Norse ( Norway and Iceland ) and Old East Norse ( Denmark and Sweden ). 
 The subdialect of Old East Norse spoken in Sweden is called Runic Swedish and the one in Denmark Runic Danish (there was also a subdialect spoken in Gotland , Old Gutnish ) but until the 12th century, the dialect was the same in the two countries with the main exception of a Runic Danish monophthongization (see below). The dialects are called runic because the main body of text appears in the runic alphabet . Unlike Proto-Norse , which was written with the Elder Futhark alphabet, Old Norse was written with the Younger Futhark alphabet, which only had 16 letters. Because the number of runes was limited, some runes were used for a range of phonemes , such as the rune for the vowel u which was also used for the vowels o , ø and y , and the rune for i which was also used for e . 
 From 1100 onwards, the dialect of Denmark began to diverge from that of Sweden. The innovations spread unevenly from Denmark which created a series of minor dialectal boundaries, isoglosses , ranging from Zealand in the south to Norrland , Österbotten and northwestern Finland in the north. 
 An early change that separated Runic Danish from the other dialects of Old East Norse was the change of the diphthong æi to the monophthong é , as in stæinn to sténn "stone". This is reflected in runic inscriptions where the older read stain and the later stin . There was also a change of au as in dauðr into a long open ø as in døðr "dead". This change is shown in runic inscriptions as a change from tauþr into tuþr . Moreover, the øy diphthong changed into a long close ø , as in the Old Norse word for "island". These innovations had affected most of the Runic Swedish speaking area as well in the end of the period, with the exception of the dialects spoken north and east of Mälardalen where the diphthongs still exist in remote areas.  
 Old Swedish  
 
 
 
  
A copy of Äldre Västgötalagen —a law code of Västergötland from the 1280s, one of the earliest texts in Swedish written in the Latin script . 
 
 
 Main article: Old Swedish 
 Old Swedish is the term used for the medieval Swedish language, starting in 1225. Among the most important documents of the period written in Latin script is the oldest of the provincial law codes , the Västgöta code or Västgötalagen , of which fragments dated to 1250 have been found. The main influences during this time came with the firm establishment of the Christian church and various monastic orders, introducing many Greek and Latin loanwords. With the rise of Hanseatic power in the late 13th and early 14th century, the influence of Middle Low German became ever more present. The Hanseatic league provided Swedish commerce and administration with a large number of German- and Dutch-speaking immigrants. Many became quite influential members of Swedish medieval society, and brought terms from their mother tongue into the vocabulary. Besides a great number of loanwords for such areas as warfare, trade and administration, general grammatical suffixes and even conjunctions were imported. Almost all of the naval terms were also borrowed from Dutch . 
 Early medieval Swedish was markedly different from the modern language in that it had a more complex case structure and had not yet experienced a reduction of the gender system. Nouns , adjectives , pronouns and certain numerals were inflected in four cases; besides the modern nominative , there were also the genitive , dative and accusative . The gender system resembled that of modern German , having the genders masculine, feminine and neuter. Most of the masculine and feminine nouns were later grouped together into a common gender. The verb system was also more complex: it included subjunctive and imperative moods and verbs were conjugated according to person as well as number. By the 16th century, the case and gender systems of the colloquial spoken language and the profane literature had been largely reduced to the two cases and two genders of modern Swedish. The old inflections remained common in high prose style until the 18th century, and in some dialects into the early 20th century. 
 A transitional change of the Latin script in the Nordic countries was to spell the letter combination "ae" as æ – and sometimes as a' – though it varied between persons and regions. The combination "ao" was similarly rendered a o , and "oe" became o e . These three were later to evolve into the separate letters ä , å and ö .  
 Modern Swedish  
 Main article: Modern Swedish 
 
 
 
  
Front page of Gustav Vasa 's Bible from 1541, using Fraktur . The title translated to English reads: "The Bible / That is / The Holy Scripture / in Swedish. Printed in Uppsala . 1541". 
 
 
 Modern Swedish (Swedish: nysvenska ) begins with the advent of the printing press and the European Reformation . After assuming power, the new monarch Gustav Vasa ordered a Swedish translation of the Bible . The New Testament was published in 1526, followed by a full Bible translation in 1541, usually referred to as the Gustav Vasa Bible , a translation deemed so successful and influential that, with revisions incorporated in successive editions, it remained the most common Bible translation until 1917. The main translators were Laurentius Andreæ and the brothers Laurentius and Olaus Petri . 
 The Vasa Bible is often considered to be a reasonable compromise between old and new; while not adhering to the colloquial spoken language of its day it was not overly conservative in its use of archaic forms.  It was a major step towards a more consistent Swedish orthography . It established the use of the vowels "å", "ä", and "ö", and the spelling "ck" in place of "kk", distinguishing it clearly from the Danish Bible, perhaps intentionally, given the ongoing rivalry between the countries. All three translators came from central Sweden which is generally seen as adding specific Central Swedish features to the new Bible. 
 Though it might seem as if the Bible translation set a very powerful precedent for orthographic standards, spelling actually became more inconsistent during the remainder of the century. It was not until the 17th century that spelling began to be discussed, around the time when the first grammars were written. The spelling debate raged on until the early 19th century, and it was not until the latter half of the 19th century that the orthography reached generally acknowledged standards. 
 Capitalization during this time was not standardized. It depended on the authors and their background. Those influenced by German capitalized all nouns, while others capitalized more sparsely. It is also not always apparent which letters are capitalized owing to the Gothic or blackletter typeface which was used to print the Bible. This typeface was in use until the mid-18th century, when it was gradually replaced with a Latin typeface (often antiqua ). 
 Some important changes in sound during the Modern Swedish period were the gradual assimilation of several different consonant clusters into the fricative  
 
 
 
  
 August Strindberg , one of the most influential writers in modern Swedish literature. 
 
 
 Contemporary Swedish  
 The period that includes Swedish as it is spoken today is termed nusvenska (lit. "Now-Swedish") in linguistic terminology and started in the last decades of the 19th century. The period saw a democratization of the language with a less formal written language that came closer to spoken language. The growth of a public schooling system also led to the evolution of so-called boksvenska (literally "book Swedish"), especially among the working classes, where spelling to some extent influenced pronunciation, particularly in official contexts. With the industrialization and urbanization of Sweden well under way by the last decades of the 19th century, a new breed of authors made their mark on Swedish literature . Many scholars, politicians and other public figures had a great influence on the new national language that was emerging, and among them were prolific authors like the poet Gustaf Fröding , Nobel laureate Selma Lagerlöf , and radical writer and playwright August Strindberg .  
 It was during the 20th century that a common, standardized national language became available to all Swedes. The orthography was finally stabilized, and was almost completely uniform, with the exception of some minor deviations, by the time of the spelling reform of 1906. With the exception of plural forms of verbs and a slightly different syntax, particularly in the written language, the language was the same as the Swedish of today. The plural verb forms appeared decreasingly in formal writing into the 1950s, when their use was removed from all official recommendations. 
 A very significant change in Swedish occurred in the late 1960s, with the so-called du-reformen , "the you-reform". Previously, the proper way to address people of the same or higher social status had been by title and surname . The use of herr ("Mr" or "Sir"), fru ("Mrs" or "Ma'am") or fröken ("Miss") was considered the only acceptable mode of initiating conversation with strangers of unknown occupation, academic title or military rank. The fact that the listener should preferably be referred to in the third person tended to further complicate spoken communication between members of society. In the early 20th century, an unsuccessful attempt was made to replace the insistence on titles with ni (the standard second person plural pronoun ), analogous to the French Vous . (Cf. T-V distinction .) Ni (plural second person pronoun) wound up being used as a slightly less familiar form of du (singular second person pronoun) used to address people of lower social status. With the liberalization and radicalization of Swedish society in the 1950s and 1960s, these previously significant distinctions of class became less important, and du became the standard, even in formal and official contexts. Though the reform was not an act of any centralized political decrees, but rather a sweeping change in social attitudes, it was completed in just a few years from the late 1960s to early 1970s.  The use of ni as a polite form of address is today occasionally in both the written and spoken language, particularly among younger speakers. 
 Former language minorities  
 
 
 
  
Map of the Estonian islands which formerly housed " Coastal Swede " populations 
 
 
 From the 13th to 20th century, there were Swedish-speaking communities in Estonia , particularly on the islands (e.g., Hiiumaa , Vormsi , Ruhnu ; in Swedish, known as Dagö , Ormsö , Runö , respectively) along the coast of the Baltic , communities which today have all but disappeared. The Swedish-speaking minority was represented in parliament , and entitled to use their native language in parliamentary debates. After the loss of Estonia to the Russian Empire in the early 18th century, around 1,000 Estonian Swedish speakers were forced to march to southern Ukraine , where they founded a village, Gammalsvenskby ("Old Swedish Village"). A few elderly people in the village still speak Swedish and observe the holidays of the Swedish calendar, although the dialect is most likely facing extinction.  
 From 1918–1940, when Estonia was independent, the small Swedish community was well treated. Municipalities with a Swedish majority, mainly found along the coast, used Swedish as the administrative language and Swedish-Estonian culture saw an upswing. However, most Swedish-speaking people fled to Sweden before the end of World War II , that is, before the invasion of Estonia by the Soviet army in 1944. Only a handful of older speakers remain.  
 Geographic distribution  
 Swedish is the national language of Sweden and the first language for the overwhelming majority of roughly eight million Swedish-born inhabitants and acquired by one million immigrants. 
 As of 2007 around 5.5% of the population of Finland was Swedish speaking,  In several more, it is the majority language, and it is an official minority language in even more. 
 There is considerable migration between the Nordic countries , but owing to the similarity between the cultures and languages (with the exception of Finnish ), expatriates generally assimilate quickly and do not stand out as a group. According to the 2000 United States Census , some 67,000 people over the age of five were reported as Swedish speakers, though without any information on the degree of language proficiency.  
 Official status  
 
 
 
  
A Finnish /Swedish street sign in Finland 
 
 
 Swedish is officially the main language of Sweden.  
 Swedish is the only official language of Åland (an autonomous province under the sovereignty of Finland ) where the vast majority of the 26,000 inhabitants speak Swedish as a first language. In Finland as a whole Swedish is one of the two "national" languages, with the same official status as Finnish (spoken by the majority) on the state level and an official language in many coastal municipalities. Three municipalities ( Korsnäs , Närpes , Larsmo ) in mainland Finland have Swedish as their sole official language. 
 Swedish is also one of the official languages of the European Union and one of the working languages of the Nordic Council . Under the Nordic Language Convention , citizens of the Nordic countries speaking Swedish have the opportunity to use their native language when interacting with official bodies in other Nordic countries without being liable to any interpretation or translation costs.  
 Regulatory bodies  
 The Swedish Language Council ( Språkrådet ) is the official regulator of Swedish in Sweden but does not attempt to enforce control of the language, as for instance the Académie française does for French . However, many organizations and agencies require the use of the council's publication Svenska skrivregler in official contexts, with it otherwise being regarded as a de facto orthographic standard. Among the many organizations that make up the Swedish Language Council, the Swedish Academy (established 1786) is arguably the most influential. Its primary instruments are the dictionaries Svenska Akademiens ordlista ( SAOL , currently in its 13th edition) and Svenska Akademiens Ordbok , in addition to various books on grammar, spelling and manuals of style . Even though the dictionaries are sometimes used as official decrees of the language, their main purpose is to describe current usage. 
 In Finland a special branch of the Research Institute for the Languages of Finland has official status as the regulatory body for Swedish in Finland. Among its highest priorities is to maintain intelligibility with the language spoken in Sweden. It has published Finlandssvensk ordbok , a dictionary about the differences between Swedish in Finland and Sweden. 
 Dialects  
 Main article: Swedish dialects 
 According to a traditional division of Swedish dialects , there are six main groups of dialects:  
 
 Norrland dialects 
 Finland Swedish 
 Svealand dialects 
 Gotland dialects 
 Götaland dialects 
 South Swedish dialects 
 
 The traditional definition of a Swedish dialect has been a local variant that has not been heavily influenced by the standard language and that can trace a separate development all the way back to Old Norse . Many of the genuine rural dialects, such as those of Orsa in Dalarna or Närpes in Österbotten , have very distinct phonetic and grammatical features, such as plural forms of verbs or archaic case inflections. These dialects can be near-incomprehensible to a majority of Swedes, and most of their speakers are also fluent in Standard Swedish. The different dialects are often so localized that they are limited to individual parishes and are referred to by Swedish linguists as sockenmål (lit. "parish speech"). They are generally separated into six major groups, with common characteristics of prosody, grammar and vocabulary. One or several examples from each group are given here. Though each example is intended to be also representative of the nearby dialects, the actual number of dialects is several hundred if each individual community is considered separately.  
 This type of classification, however, is based on a somewhat romanticized nationalist view of ethnicity and language. The idea that only rural variants of Swedish should be considered "genuine" is not generally accepted by modern scholars. No dialects, no matter how remote or obscure, remained unchanged or undisturbed by a minimum of influences from surrounding dialects or the standard language, especially not from the late 19th century onwards with the advent of mass media and advanced forms of transport. The differences are today more accurately described by a scale that runs from "standard language" to "rural dialect" where the speech even of the same person may vary from one extreme to the other depending on the situation. All Swedish dialects with the exception of the highly diverging forms of speech in Dalarna , Norrbotten and, to some extent, Gotland can be considered to be part of a common, mutually intelligible dialect continuum . This continuum may also include Norwegian and some Danish dialects .  
 The samples linked below have been taken from SweDia, a research project on Swedish modern dialects available for download (though with information in Swedish only), with many more samples from 100 different dialects with recordings from four different speakers: older female, older male, younger female and younger male. The dialect groups are those traditionally used by dialectologists.  
 
 
 
  
Map showing location of the various modern dialect samples 
 
 
 
 Överkalix , Norrbotten ; younger female 
 Burträsk , Västerbotten ; older female 
 Aspås , Jämtland ; younger female 
 Färila , Hälsingland ; older male 
 Älvdalen , Dalarna ; older female (this is Elfdalian ) 
 Gräsö , Uppland ; older male 
 Sorunda , Södermanland ; younger male 
 Köla , Värmland younger female 
 Viby , Närke ; older male 
 Sproge , Gotland ; younger female 
 Närpes , Ostrobothnia ; younger female 
 Dragsfjärd , Finland Proper ; older male 
 Borgå , Eastern Uusimaa ; younger male 
 Orust , Bohuslän ; older male 
 Floby , Västergötland ; older female 
 Rimforsa , Östergötland ; older female 
 Årstad - Heberg , Halland ; younger male 
 Stenberga , Småland ; younger female 
 Jämshög , Blekinge ; older female 
 Bara , Scania ; older male 
 
 Standard Swedish  
 Standard Swedish is the language used by virtually all Swedes and most Swedish-speaking Finns . It is called rikssvenska or standardsvenska ("Standard Swedish") in Sweden. In Finland högsvenska ("High Swedish") is used for the Finnish variant of standard Swedish and rikssvenska refers to Swedish as spoken in Sweden in general. The word högsvenska is seldom used in Sweden. 
 There are many regional varieties of the standard language that are specific to geographical areas of varying size (regions, historical provinces , cities, towns, etc.). In mass media it is no longer uncommon for journalists to speak with a distinct regional accent, but the most common pronunciation and the one perceived as the most formal is still Central Standard Swedish. 
 Though this terminology and its definitions have long been established among linguists, most Swedes are unaware of the distinction and its historical background, and often refer to the regional varieties as "dialects". In a poll that was conducted in 2005 by the Swedish Retail Institute ( Handelns Utredningsinstitut ), the attitudes of Swedes to the use of certain dialects by salesmen revealed that 54% believed that rikssvenska was the variety they would prefer to hear when speaking with salesmen over the phone, even though several dialects such as gotländska or skånska were provided as alternatives in the poll.  
 Finland Swedish  
 Main articles: Finland Swedish and Åland Swedish 
 Finland was a part of Sweden from the 13th century until the loss of the Finnish territories to Russia in 1809. Swedish was the sole administrative language until 1902 as well as the dominant language of culture and education until Finnish independence in 1917. The percentage of Swedish speakers in Finland has steadily decreased since then. The Swedish-speaking population is mainly concentrated in the coastal areas of Ostrobothnia , Finland Proper , Nyland and Åland where the percentage of Finland Swedes partly is fairly high. Swedish is still an official language in Finland, sharing the same rights as Finnish . The country's public broadcaster, YLE , provides two Swedish-language radio stations, Radio Vega and YLE X3M , as well a TV channel, Yle Fem . 
 Immigrant variants  
 Rinkeby Swedish (after Rinkeby , a suburb of northern Stockholm with a large immigrant population) is a common name among linguists for varieties of Swedish spoken by young people of foreign heritage in certain suburbs and urban districts in the major cities of Stockholm, Gothenburg and Malmö . These varieties could alternatively be classified as sociolects , because the immigrant dialects share common traits independent of their geographical spread or the native country of the speakers. However, some studies have found distinctive features and led to terms such as Rosengård Swedish (after Rosengård in Malmö), a variant of Scanian .  
 Phonology  
 Main article: Swedish phonology 
 
 
 
  
 Isogloss for the pronunciation of "R", c. 1960; alveolar north and uvular "French R" south of the boundary. With this follows also that the R+S consonant combination is pronounced as spelled south of the boundary, while it's pronounced as "ch" (as in "chocolate") north of it. This isogloss is considered as the most imperative within all Swedish pronunciation differencies 
 
 
 Swedish dialects have either 17 or 18 vowel phonemes , 9 long and 9 short. As in the other Germanic languages, including English, most long vowels are phonetically paired with one of the short vowels, and the pairs are such that the two vowels are of similar quality , but with the short vowel being slightly lower and slightly centralized. In most dialects, the short vowel sound pronounced  has merged with the short /e/ (transcribed 〈 ɛ 〉 in the chart below). 
 There are 18 consonant phonemes, two of which, / ɧ / and /r/ , vary considerably in pronunciation depending on the dialect and social status of the speaker. In many dialects, sequences of /r/ with a dental consonant result in retroflex consonants . /r/ has a guttural or "French-R" pronunciation in the dialects of ex-Danish (and bordering) provinces; consequently, these dialects lack retroflex consonants. 
 In stressed syllables , there are two tones , which give Swedish much of its characteristic sound. Prosody is often one of the most noticeable differences between its dialects. 
 
 
 
  
The vowel phonemes of Central Standard Swedish. From Engstrand (1999 :140). 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bilabial 
 Labio- 
dental 
 Dental 
 Retroflex 
/ Alveolar 
 Palatal 
 Velar 
 Glottal 
 
 
 Nasal 
 
 m 
 
 
 n 
 
 
 
 ŋ 
 
 
 
 Stop 
 p 
 b 
 
 t 
 d 
 
 
 k 
 ɡ 
 
 
 
 Approximant 
 
 
 v 
 
 &#160; 
 r 
 
 j 
 
 h 
 &#160; 
 
 
 Fricative 
 
 f 
 s 
 
 ɕ 
 ɧ 
 
 
 
 
 Trill 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lateral 
 
 
 
 l 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vocabulary  
 The vocabulary of Swedish is mainly Germanic, either through common Germanic heritage or through loans from German, Middle Low German, and to some extent, English. Examples of Germanic words in Swedish are mus ("mouse"), kung ("king"), and gås ("goose"). A significant part of the religious and scientific vocabulary is of Latin or Greek origin, often borrowed from French and, lately, English. Some 1-200 words are also borrowed from Scandoromani or Romani , often as slang varieties; a commonly used word from Romani is tjej ("girl").  
 A large number of French words were imported into Sweden around the 18th century. These words have been transcribed to the Swedish spelling system and are therefore pronounced quite recognizably to a French-speaker. Most of them are distinguished by a "French accent", characterized by emphasis on the last syllable. For example, nivå (fr. niveau , "level"), fåtölj (fr. fauteuil , "arm chair") and affär ("shop; affair"), etc. Cross-borrowing from other Germanic languages has also been common, at first from Middle Low German, the lingua franca of the Hanseatic league and later from standard German . Some compounds are translations of the elements ( calques ) of German original compounds into Swedish, like bomull from German Baumwolle ("cotton", literally tree-wool ).  
 As with many Germanic languages, new words can be formed by compounding, e.g. nouns like nagellackborttagningsmedel ("nail polish remover") or verbs like smygfilma ("to film in secret"). Similar to German or Dutch , very long, and quite impractical, examples like produktionsstyrningssystemsprogramvaruuppdatering ("production controller system software update") are possible, but it is seldom this ungainly, at least in spoken Swedish and outside of technical writing. Compound nouns take their gender from the head , which in Swedish is always the last morpheme. New words can also be coined by derivation from other established words, such as the verbification of nouns by the adding of the suffix -a , as in bil ("car") and bila ("travel (recreationally) by car"). The opposite, making nouns of verbs, is also possible, as in tänk ("way of thinking; concept") from tänka ("to think"). 
 Writing system  
 The Swedish alphabet is a 29-letter alphabet , using the 26-letter ISO basic Latin alphabet plus the three additional letters Å / å , Ä / ä , and Ö / ö constructed in the 16th century by writing "o" and "e" on top of an "a", and an "e" on top of an "o". Though these combinations are historically modified versions of A and O according to the English range of usage for the term diacritic , these three characters are not considered to be diacritics within the Swedish application, but rather separate letters, and are independent letters following z . Before the release of the 13th edition of Svenska Akademiens ordlista in April 2006, w was treated as merely a variant of v used only in names (such as "Wallenberg") and foreign words ("bowling"), and so was both sorted and pronounced as a v . Other diacritics (to use the broader English term usage referenced here) are unusual in Swedish; é is sometimes used to indicate that the stress falls on a terminal syllable containing e , especially when the stress changes the meaning ( ide vs. idé , "winter lair" vs. "idea") as well as in some names, like Kastrén ; occasionally other acute accents and, less often, grave accents can be seen in names and some foreign words. The letter à is used to refer to unit cost (a loan from the French), equivalent to the at sign (@) in English. 
 The German ü is treated as a variant of y and sometimes retained in foreign names and words, e.g. müsli ("muesli/granola"). A proper diaeresis may very exceptionally be seen in elaborated style (for instance: "Aïda"). The German convention of writing ä and ö as ae and oe if the characters are unavailable is an unusual convention for speakers of modern Swedish. Despite the availability of all these characters in the Swedish national top-level Internet domain and other such domains, Swedish sites are frequently labelled using a and o , based on visual similarity (mainly to avoid lingering technical problems with the use of characters which are outside of the limited 7-bit ASCII set). 
 In Swedish orthography , the colon is used in a similar manner as in English , with some exceptions: the colon is used for some abbreviations, such as 3:e for tredje ("third") and S:t for Sankt ("Saint"), and for all types of suffixes that can be added to numbers, letters and abbreviations, such as a:et ("the a") and CD:n ("the CD").  
 Grammar  
 Main article: Swedish grammar 
 Swedish nouns and adjectives are declined in genders as well as number . Nouns belong to one of two genders—common for the en form or neuter for the ett form  —which also determine the declension of adjectives . For example, the word fisk ("fish") is a noun of common gender ( en fisk ) and can have the following forms: 
 
 
 
 Singular 
 Plural 
 
 
 Indefinite form 
 fisk 
 fiskar 
 
 
 Definite form 
 fisken 
 fiskarna 
 
 
 The definite singular form of a noun is created by adding a suffix ( -en , -n , -et or -t ), depending on its gender and if the noun ends in a vowel or not. The definite articles den , det , and de are used for variations to the definitiveness of a noun. They can double as demonstrative pronouns or demonstrative determiners when used with adverbs such as här ("here") or där ("there") to form den/det här (can also be "denna/detta") ("this"), de här (can also be "dessa") ("these"), den/det där ("that"), and de där ("those"). For example, den där fisken means "that fish" and refers to a specific fish; den fisken is less definite and means "that fish" in a more abstract sense, such as that set of fish; while fisken means "the fish". In certain cases, the definite form indicates possession, e.g., jag måste tvätta hår et ("I must wash my hair"). 
 Adjectives are inflected in two declensions — indefinite and definite — and they must match the noun they modify in gender and number. The indefinite neuter and plural forms of an adjective are usually created by adding a suffix ( -t or -a ) to the common form of the adjective, e.g., en grön stol (a green chair), ett grönt hus (a green house), and gröna stolar ("green chairs). The definite form of an adjective is identical to the indefinite plural form, e.g., den gröna stolen ("the green chair"), det gröna huset ("the green house"), and de gröna stolarna ("the green chairs"). 
 Swedish pronouns are similar to those of English. Besides the two natural genders han/hon ("he/she"), there are also the two grammatical genders den/det , usually termed common and neuter . Unlike the nouns, pronouns have an additional object form, derived from the old dative form. Hon , for example, has the following nominative, possessive, and object forms: 
 
 hon – hennes – henne 
 
 Swedish also uses third-person possessive reflexive pronouns that refer to the subject in a clause, a trait which is restricted to North Germanic languages: 
 
 Anna gav Maria sin bok. ; "Anna gave Maria her  book." (reflexive) 
 Anna gav Maria hennes bok. ; "Anna gave Maria her  book." (not reflexive) 
 
 Swedish used to have genitive that was placed at the end of the head of a noun phrase. In modern Swedish, it has become an enclitic -s , which attaches to the end of the noun phrase, rather than the noun itself.  
 
 hästen ; "the horse" — hästens "the horse's" 
 hästen på den blommande ängens svarta man ; "the horse in the flowering meadow's black mane" 
 
 In formal written language, it used to be considered correct to place the genitive -s after the head of the noun phrase ( hästen ), though this is today considered dated, and different grammatical constructions are often used.  
 Verbs are conjugated according to tense . One group of verbs (the ones ending in -er in present tense) has a special imperative form (generally the verb stem ), but with most verbs the imperative is identical to the infinitive form. Perfect and present participles as adjectival verbs are very common: 
 
 Perfect participle: en stekt fisk ; "a fried fish" (steka = to fry) 
 Present participle: en stinkande fisk ; "a stinking fish" (stinka = to stink) 
 
 In contrast to English and many other languages, Swedish does not use the perfect participle to form the present perfect and past perfect. Rather, the auxiliary verb har ("have"), hade ("had") is followed by a special form, called supine , used solely for this purpose (although often identical to the neuter form of the perfect participle): 
 
 Perfect participle: målad , "painted" – supine målat , present perfect har målat ; "have painted" 
 Perfect participle: stekt , "fried" – supine stekt , present perfect har stekt ; "have fried" 
 Perfect participle: skriven , "written" – supine skrivit , present perfect har skrivit ; "have written" 
 
 When building the compound passive voice using the verb att bli , the past participle is used: 
 
 den blir målad ; "it's being painted" 
 den blev målad ; "it was painted" 
 
 There exists also an inflected passive voice formed by adding -s , replacing the final r in the present tense: 
 
 den målas ; "it's being painted" 
 den målades ; "it was painted" 
 
 In a subordinate clause , the auxiliary har is optional and often omitted, particularly in written Swedish. 
 
 Jag ser att han (har) stekt fisken ; "I see that he has fried the fish" 
 
 Subjunctive mood is occasionally used for some verbs, but its use is in sharp decline and few speakers perceive the handful of commonly used verbs (as for instance: vore, månne ) as separate conjugations, most of them remaining only as set of idiomatic expressions . 
 Where other languages may use grammatical cases , Swedish uses numerous prepositions , similar to those found in English . As in modern German , prepositions formerly determined case in Swedish, but this feature can only be found in certain idiomatic expressions like till sjöss ("at sea", genitive). 
 As Swedish is a Germanic language, the syntax shows similarities to both English and German. Like English, Swedish has a subject–verb–object basic word order, but like German, it utilizes verb-second word order in main clauses, for instance after adverbs , adverbial phrases and dependent clauses . (Adverbial phrases denoting time are usually placed at the beginning of a main clause that is at the head of a sentence.) Prepositional phrases are placed in a place–manner–time order, as in English (but not German). Adjectives precede the noun they modify.  
 Sample  
 Excerpt from Barfotabarn (1933), by Nils Ferlin (1898–1961): 
 
 
 Original 
 Free translation 
 
 
 Du har tappat ditt ord och din papperslapp, 
 "You have lost your word and your written note, 
 
 
 du barfotabarn i livet. 
 you barefooted child in life. 
 
 
 Så sitter du åter på handlar'ns trapp 
 So you sit on the porch of the grocer anew 
 
 
 och gråter så övergivet. 
 and cry so abandoned. 
 
 
 Vad var det för ord – var det långt eller kort, 
 What word was it – was it long or short, 
 
 
 var det väl eller illa skrivet? 
 was it well or poorly written? 
 
 
 Tänk efter nu – förr'n vi föser dig bort, 
 Think twice now – before we shove you away, 
 
 
 du barfotabarn i livet. 
 you barefooted child in life." 
 
 
 See also  
 
 Languages of Finland 
 Languages of Sweden 
 Swedish as a foreign language 
 Swenglish 
 
 Notes  
 
 
 ^  a   b  Nationalencyklopedin "Världens 100 största språk 2007" The World's 100 Largest Languages in 2007 
 ^  a   b  Crystal 1999 , Scandinavian 
 ^  Bergman 1984 , pp.&#160;21–23 
 ^  Pettersson 1996 , p.&#160;139 
 ^  Pettersson 1996 , p.&#160;151 
 ^  Pettersson 1996 , p.&#160;138 
 ^  Josephson 2005 , chapter 2 
 ^  Nationalencyklopedin, du-tilltal and ni-tilltal 
 ^  The number of registered Swedes in Zmeyovka (the modern Ukrainian name of Gammalsvenskby ) as of 1994 was 116 according to Nationalencyklopedin , article svenskbyborna . 
 ^  Nationalencyklopedin , estlandssvenskar . 
 ^  Population structure . Statistics Finland (2007-03-29). Retrieved on 2007-11-27. 
 ^  Main outlines of Finnish History – thisisFINLAND . 
 ^  "Svensk- och tvåspråkiga kommuner" , kommunerna.net (in Swedish), February 2007 , retrieved 2007-12-03 &#160; 
 ^  Swedish . Many Languages, One America . U.S. English Foundation (2005). Retrieved on 2007-11-27. Archived December 1, 2007 at the Wayback Machine 
 ^  2006 Census: Highlight tables , 2.statcan.ca , retrieved 2008-09-28 &#160; 
 ^  Krisberedskap på svenska ambassaden , Dagens Nyheter , 2005-07-22 , retrieved 2012-01-04 &#160; 
 ^  Learn Swedish . Studyinsweden.se . Retrieved on 2011-01-27. 
 ^  "Språklagen" , Språkförsvaret (in Swedish), 2009-07-01 , retrieved 2009-07-15 &#160; 
 ^  Landes, David (2009-07-01), "Swedish becomes official 'main language ' " , The Local (thelocal.se) , retrieved 2009-07-15 &#160; 
 ^  "Svenskan blir inte officiellt språk" , Sveriges Television (in Swedish), 2005-12-07 , retrieved 2006-06-23 &#160; 
 ^  "Värna språken – förslag till språklag" , Government Offices of Sweden (in Swedish), 2008-03-18 , retrieved 2008-06-19 &#160; 
 ^  "Konvention mellan Sverige, Danmark, Finland, Island och Norge om nordiska medborgares rätt att använda sitt eget språk i annat nordiskt land" , Nordic Council (in Swedish), 2007-05-02, archived from the original on 2007-04-18 , retrieved 2007-04-25 &#160; 
 ^  "20th anniversary of the Nordic Language Convention" , Nordic news (in Swedish), 2007-02-22 , retrieved 2007-04-25 &#160; 
 ^  Leinonen 2011 
 ^  Engstrand 2004 , p.&#160;120 
 ^  Dahl 2000 , pp.&#160;117–119 
 ^  Pettersson 1996 , p.&#160;184 
 ^  Aronsson, Cecilia (2005-05-03), "Norrländska låter bäst" , Dagens Industri , archived from the original on 2007-10-13 , retrieved 2007-08-24 , "Norrländska och rikssvenska är de mest förtroendeingivande dialekterna. Men gotländska och värmländska gör svenskarna misstänksamma, enligt en ny riksomfattande undersökning. Handelns utredningsinstitut (HUI) har frågat 800 svenskar om hur de uppfattar olika dialekter som de hör i telefonservicesamtal, exempelvis från försäljare eller upplysningscentraler. Undersökningen visar att 54 procent föredrar att motparten pratar rikssvenska, vilket troligen hänger ihop med dess tydlighet. Men även norrländskan plockar höga poäng—25 procent tycker att det är den mest förtroendeingivande dialekten. Tilltron till norrländska är ännu större hos personer under 29 år, medan stödet för rikssvenska är störst bland personer över 55 år." &#160; 
 ^  Bodén, Petra, Ey, mannen! Wazzup? / På jakt efter "rosengårdssvenskan" , Institutionen för nordiska språk och Institutionen för lingvistik, Lunds universitet &#160; 
 ^  Kotsinas 1994 , p.&#160;151 
 ^  Wessén 1960 1973 1998 2003 
 ^  Nationalencyklopedin, svenska: språkhistoria 
 ^  Svenska språknämnden 2000 , pp.&#160;154–156 
 ^  Granberry 1991 , pp.&#160;18–19 
 ^  Hultman 2003 , pp.&#160;70, 212–13 
 ^  Hultman 2003 , p.&#160;213 
 ^  Bolander 2002 
 
 
 References  
 Print sources  
 
 
 Bergman, Gösta (1984), Kortfattad svensk språkhistoria , Prisma Magnum (in Swedish) (4th ed.), Stockholm: Prisma, ISBN &#160; 91-518-1747-0 , OCLC &#160; 13259382 &#160; 
 Bolander, Maria (2002), Funktionell svensk grammatik (in Swedish), Stockholm: Liber, ISBN &#160; 91-47-05054-3 , OCLC &#160; 67138445 &#160; 
 Crystal, David (1999), The Penguin dictionary of language (2nd ed.), London: Penguin Books , ISBN &#160; 0-14-051416-3 , OCLC &#160; 59441560 &#160; 
 Dahl, Östen (2000), Språkets enhet och mångfald (in Swedish), Lund: Studentlitteratur, ISBN &#160; 91-44-01158-X , OCLC &#160; 61100963 &#160; 
 Elert, Claes-Christian (2000), Allmän och svensk fonetik (in Swedish) (8th ed.), Stockholm: Norstedts Akademiska Förlag, ISBN &#160; 91-1-300939-7 &#160; 
 Engstrand, Olle (1999), "Swedish", Handbook of the International Phonetic Association: A Guide to the usage of the International Phonetic Alphabet. , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.&#160;140–142, ISBN &#160; 0-521-63751-1 &#160; 
 Engstrand, Olle (2004), Fonetikens grunder (in Swedish), Lund: Studentlitteratur, ISBN &#160; 91-44-04238-8 , OCLC &#160; 66026795 &#160; 
 Ferlin, Nils (1976), Barfotabarn (in Swedish), Stockholm: Bonnier, ISBN &#160; 91-0-024187-3 &#160; 
 Garlén, Claes (1988), Svenskans fonologi (in Swedish), Lund: Studentlitteratur, ISBN &#160; 91-44-28151-X , OCLC &#160; 67420810 &#160; 
 Granberry, Julian (1991), Essential Swedish Grammar , New York: Dover Publications , ISBN &#160; 0-486-26953-1 , OCLC &#160; 23692877 &#160; 
 Hultman, Tor G. (2003), Svenska Akademiens språklära (in Swedish), Stockholm: Norstedts, ISBN &#160; 9172273518 , OCLC &#160; 55849724 &#160; 
 International Phonetic Association (1999), Handbook of the International Phonetic Association: a guide to the use of the International Phonetic Alphabet , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press , ISBN &#160; 0-521-63751-1 , OCLC &#160; 40305532 &#160; 
 Josephson, Olle (2005), Ju: ifrågasatta självklarheter om svenskan, engelskan och alla andra språk i Sverige (in Swedish) (2nd edition ed.), Stockholm: Nordstedts ordbok, ISBN &#160; 91-7227-446-8 &#160; 
 Kotsinas, Ulla-Britt (1994), Ungdomsspråk (in Swedish), Uppsala: Hallgren &amp; Fallgren, ISBN &#160; 91-7382-718-5 , OCLC &#160; 60994967 &#160; 
 Leinonen, Therese (2011), "Aggregate analysis of vowel pronunciation in Swedish dialects" , Oslo Studies in Language 3 (2) &#160; 
 Pettersson, Gertrud (1996), Svenska språket under sjuhundra år: en historia om svenskan och dess utforskande (in Swedish), Lund: Studentlitteratur, ISBN &#160; 91-44-48221-3 , OCLC &#160; 36130929 &#160; 
 Svenska språknämnden (2000), Svenska skrivregler (in Swedish) (2nd ed.), Stockholm: Liber (published 2002), ISBN &#160; 91-47-04974-X &#160; 
 Svensson, Lars (1974), Nordisk paleografi: Handbok med transkriberade och kommenterade skriftprov (in Swedish), Lund: Studentlitteratur, ISBN &#160; 91-44-05391-6 , OCLC &#160; 1303752 &#160; 
 
 
 Web sources  
 
 
 Nationalencyklopedin (online edition) (Swedish) 
 Föreningen Svenskbyborna (Svenskbyborna Society) (Swedish) 
 
 
 Recommended reading  
 Language courses  
 
 Colloquial Swedish–The complete course for beginners Second Edition . Holmes, Philip; Serin, Gunilla (1999). London; New York: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-13718-7 
 Teach Yourself Swedish–A complete course for beginners . Croghan, Vera (1995). London: Hodder &amp; Stoughton. Chicago: NTC/Contemporary Publishing. ISBN 0-340-61860-4 
 Svenska utifrån–Lärobok i svenska . Nyborg, Roger; et al. (2001) ISBN 91-520-0673-5 
 På svenska! 1 Svenska som främmande språk–Lärobok . Göransson, Ulla; et al. (1997) ISBN 91-7434-392-0 
 På svenska! 2 Svenska som främmande språk–Lärobok . Göransson, Ulla; et al. (2002) ISBN 91-7434-462-5 
 Swedish Basic Course . Fsi-language.org. Foreign Service Institute 
 Rivstart&#160;: A1+A2 . Scherrer, Paula Levy; Lindemalm, Karl (2008). Natur och Kultur. ISBN 978-91-27-66685-6 
 Rivstart&#160;: B1+B2 . Scherrer, Paula Levy; Lindemalm, Karl (2009). Natur och Kultur. ISBN 91-27-66687-5 
 
 Grammars  
 
 Swedish Essentials of Grammar Viberg, Åke; et al. (1991) Chicago: Passport Books. ISBN 0-8442-8539- 
 Swedish: An Essential Grammar . Holmes, Philip; Hinchliffe, Ian; (2000). London; New York: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-16048-0 . 
 Swedish: A Comprehensive Grammar Second Edition . Holmes, Philip; Hinchliffe, Ian; (2003). London; New York: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-27884-8 . 
 Svenska utifrån. Schematic grammar–Swedish structures and everyday phrases Byrman, Gunilla; Holm, Britta; (1998) ISBN 91-520-0519-4 . 
 
 Dictionaries  
 
 Prisma's Swedish-English Dictionary Third Edition (1997) ISBN 0-8166-3163-8 
 Prisma's English-Swedish Dictionary Third Edition (1997) ISBN 0-8166-3162-X 
 Norstedts lilla engelska ordbok Petti, Vincent; Petti, Kerstin; (1999) ISBN 91-7227-009-8 . 
 Norstedts första svenska ordbok Ernby, Birgitta; et al. (2001) ISBN 91-7227-186-8 . 
 
 External links  
 
 
 
 Swedish edition of Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Swedish 
 
 
 
 
 
 For a list of words relating to Swedish language, see the Swedish language category of words in Wiktionary , the free dictionary. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikisource has the text of a 1905 New International Encyclopedia article about Swedish language . 
 
 
 Grammars  
 
 A concise Swedish Grammar , prepared by Leif Stensson. 
 Swedish basic course (student text + audio files), developed by the American Foreign Service Institute. 
 Grammar course European level A1-A2 http://www2.nok.se/laromedel/sprakverktyg/13.html 
 
 Increase vocabulary  
 
 Swedish Flashcard Site 
 Swadesh list of Swedish basic vocabulary words (from Wiktionary's Swadesh-list appendix ) 
 
 Dictionaries  
 
 Swedish-English / Swedish-Arabic / Swedish-Russian / Swedish-Spanish Dictionaries from Språkrådet – Institute for Language and Folklore 
 tyda.se 
 sv.wiktionary 
 People's dictionary 
 Swedish Dictionary from Webster's Dictionary 
 Project Runeberg's digital facsimile edition of Nordisk familjebok , the definitive Swedish-language encyclopaedia of the late 19th and early-to-mid-20th centuries. 
 Norstedts Swedish-English online dictionary 
 lexikon.se 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 t 
 e 
 
 
 Swedish language 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Variants 
 
 
 
 Standard Swedish 
 Finland Swedish 
 Åland Swedish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dialects 
 
 
 
 Gotländska mål 
 Götamål 
 Norrländska mål : Kirunamål 
 Jämtska 
 Kalixmål 
 Westrobothnian 
 Östsvenska mål: Ostrobothnian 
 Estonian Swedish 
 Sveamål : Stockholmska 
 Rinkebysvenska 
 Uppländska 
 Gnällbältet 
 Sydsvenska mål: Skånska 
 Småländska 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Use 
 
 
 
 Alphabet 
 
 Å 
 Ä 
 Ö 
 
 
 Orthography 
 Braille 
 Grammar 
 Phonology ( sj -sound ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 History 
 
 
 
 Proto-Norse 
 Old Norse 
 Old Swedish 
 Modern Swedish 
 Contemporary Swedish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Literature 
 
 
 
 Early 
 Reformation and Renaissance 
 Enlightenment 
 Romantic 
 Realism 
 Modernist 
 
 Modernist poetry 
 Children's 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Regulators 
 
 
 
 Swedish Language Council 
 Institute for the Languages of Finland 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dictionaries 
 
 
 
 Svenska Akademiens Ordbok 
 Svenska Akademiens Ordlista 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Education 
 
 
 
 Swedish as a foreign language 
 Mandatory Swedish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Related topics 
 
 
 
 Swenglish 
 Svorsk 
 Swedish Sign Language 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 t 
 e 
 
 
 Modern Germanic languages and dialects 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 North Germanic 
 
 
 
 
 West Scandinavian 
 
 
 
 Faroese 
 Icelandic 
 Norwegian ( Nynorsk ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 East Scandinavian 
 
 
 
 Danish 
 Norwegian ( Bokmål ) 
 Swedish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 West Germanic 
 
 
 
 
 Anglo-Frisian 
 
 
 
 English 
 North Frisian 
 Saterland Frisian 
 Scots 
 West Frisian 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Low Franconian 
 
 
 
 Afrikaans 
 Dutch 
 West Flemish 
 Limburgish 
 Zeelandic 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Low German / 
 Dutch Low Saxon 
 
 
 
 Achterhooks 
 Drèents 
 East Frisian Low Saxon 
 Gronings 
 Low German 
 Plautdietsch 
 Sallaans 
 Stellingwarfs 
 Tweants 
 Veluws 
 Westphalian 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 High German 
 
 
 
 
 Central German 
 
 
 
 Colognian 
 German 
 Luxembourgish 
 Palatine German 
 Pennsylvania German 
 Hunsrik 
 Silesian German 
 Upper Saxon 
 Wymysorys 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Upper German 
 
 
 
 Alsatian 
 Bavarian 
 Colonia Tovar 
 Main-Franconian 
 Cimbrian 
 Hutterite German 
 Mòcheno 
 Swabian 
 Swiss German 
 Walser 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yiddish 
 
 
 
 Yiddish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
       



 								 
				Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Swedish_language&amp;oldid=597809891 "				 
												 Categories : Languages with ISO 639-2 code Languages with ISO 639-1 code Swedish language Languages of Finland Languages of Sweden North Germanic languages Scandinavia Subject–verb–object languages Verb-second languages  Hidden categories: Articles with hAudio microformats All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2013 Articles with Swedish-language external links Featured articles Use dmy dates from June 2011  												 
							 
		 
		 
			 Navigation menu 
			 
				 
	 Personal tools 
	 
 Create account Log in 	 
 
				 
					 
	 Namespaces 
	 
					 Article 
					 Talk 
			 
 
 
	 
		 
	 Variants 
	 
		 
					 
	 
 
				 
				 
					 
	 Views 
	 
					 Read 
					 Edit 
					 View history 
			 
 
 
	 Actions 
	 
		 
					 
	 
 
 
	 Search 
	 
					 
					 		 
	 
 
				 
			 
			 
					 
				 
	 Navigation 
	 
		 
			 Main page 
			 Contents 
			 Featured content 
			 Current events 
			 Random article 
			 Donate to Wikipedia 
			 Wikimedia Shop 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Interaction 
	 
		 
			 Help 
			 About Wikipedia 
			 Community portal 
			 Recent changes 
			 Contact page 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Tools 
	 
		 
			 What links here 
			 Related changes 
			 Upload file 
			 Special pages 
			 Permanent link 
			 Page information 
			 Data item 
 Cite this page 		 
	 
 
 
	 Print/export 
	 
		 
			 Create a book 
			 Download as PDF 
			 Printable version 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Languages 
	 
		 
			 Адыгэбзэ 
			 Afrikaans 
			 Alemannisch 
			 አማርኛ 
			 Ænglisc 
			 العربية 
			 Aragonés 
			 ܐܪܡܝܐ 
			 Arpetan 
			 Asturianu 
			 Azərbaycanca 
			 বাংলা 
			 Bân-lâm-gú 
			 Беларуская 
			 Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ 
			 Български 
			 Boarisch 
			 Bosanski 
			 Brezhoneg 
			 Català 
			 Чӑвашла 
			 Cebuano 
			 Čeština 
			 Corsu 
			 Cymraeg 
			 Dansk 
			 Deutsch 
			 ދިވެހިބަސް 
			 Dolnoserbski 
			 Eesti 
			 Ελληνικά 
			 Emiliàn e rumagnòl 
			 Эрзянь 
			 Español 
			 Esperanto 
			 Euskara 
			 Eʋegbe 
			 فارسی 
			 Fiji Hindi 
			 Føroyskt 
			 Français 
			 Frysk 
			 Gaeilge 
			 Gaelg 
			 Gàidhlig 
			 Galego 
			 贛語 
			 客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî 
			 한국어 
			 Հայերեն 
			 हिन्दी 
			 Hornjoserbsce 
			 Hrvatski 
			 Ido 
			 Ilokano 
			 Bahasa Indonesia 
			 Interlingua 
			 ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ/inuktitut 
			 Ирон 
			 IsiZulu 
			 Íslenska 
			 Italiano 
			 עברית 
			 Basa Jawa 
			 Kalaallisut 
			 ქართული 
			 Қазақша 
			 Kernowek 
			 Kiswahili 
			 Коми 
			 Kurdî 
			 Кыргызча 
			 Лакку 
			 Latina 
			 Latviešu 
			 Lietuvių 
			 Ligure 
			 Limburgs 
			 Lumbaart 
			 Magyar 
			 Македонски 
			 Malagasy 
			 Māori 
			 मराठी 
			 მარგალური 
			 مصرى 
			 مازِرونی 
			 Bahasa Melayu 
			 Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ 
			 Мокшень 
			 Монгол 
			 Nāhuatl 
			 Nederlands 
			 Nedersaksies 
			 नेपाल भाषा 
			 日本語 
			 Нохчийн 
			 Norsk bokmål 
			 Norsk nynorsk 
			 Nouormand 
			 Occitan 
			 Олык марий 
			 Oʻzbekcha 
			 ਪੰਜਾਬੀ 
			 پنجابی 
			 Piemontèis 
			 Polski 
			 Português 
			 Qırımtatarca 
			 Română 
			 Rumantsch 
			 Runa Simi 
			 Русский 
			 Sámegiella 
			 Scots 
			 Seeltersk 
			 Shqip 
			 Simple English 
			 Slovenčina 
			 Slovenščina 
			 Словѣньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟ 
			 Ślůnski 
			 Soomaaliga 
			 کوردی 
			 Српски / srpski 
			 Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски 
			 Basa Sunda 
			 Suomi 
			 Svenska 
			 Tagalog 
			 தமிழ் 
			 Татарча/tatarça 
			 ไทย 
			 Тоҷикӣ 
			 ᏣᎳᎩ 
			 Türkçe 
			 Українська 
			 اردو 
			 ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche 
			 Vèneto 
			 Vepsän kel’ 
			 Tiếng Việt 
			 Võro 
			 ייִדיש 
			 Yorùbá 
			 粵語 
			 Zazaki 
			 Zeêuws 
			 Žemaitėška 
			 中文 
			 
			 Edit links 
		 
	 
 
			 
		 
		 
							 
											 This page was last modified on 2 March 2014 at 14:13. 
											 Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. 
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
									 
							 
											 Privacy policy 
											 About Wikipedia 
											 Disclaimers 
											 Contact Wikipedia 
											 Developers 
											 Mobile view