Volapük - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 





 
 
		 
		 
		 
			 
			 
						 
						 Volapük 
			 
								 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
								 
												 
					Jump to:					 navigation , 					 search 
				 
				 This article is about the constructed language. For other uses, see Volapük (disambiguation) . 
 
 
 Volapük 
 
 
  
 Logo of the Volapük movement (2nd phase) 
 
 
 
 Created&#160;by 
 Johann Martin Schleyer 
 
 
 Date 
 1879–1880 
 
 
 Setting and usage 
 International: mostly in Europe 
 
 
 Users 
 20 &#160;(2000)  
 
 
 Purpose 
 
 constructed language 
 
 International auxiliary language 
 
 Volapük 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Writing system 
 
 Latin 
 
 
 Sources 
 vocabulary from English , German , and French 
 
 
 Official status 
 
 
 Regulated&#160;by 
 Kadäm Volapüka 
 
 
 Language codes 
 
 
 ISO 639-1 
 vo 
 
 
 ISO 639-2 
 vol 
 
 
 ISO 639-3 
 vol 
 
 
 This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. 
 
 
 Volapük ( /  ˈ  v  ɒ  l  ə  p  ʊ  k  / in English;  
 
 
 
 Contents 
 
 
 1 Orthography and pronunciation 
 
 1.1 Special consonantal letters 
 
 
 2 Syllabic stress 
 3 Letter r 
 4 Vocabulary 
 5 Grammar 
 
 5.1 Nouns 
 5.2 Adjectives and adverbs 
 5.3 Pronouns 
 5.4 Verbs 
 
 
 6 History 
 7 Examples 
 
 7.1 The Lord's Prayer 
 7.2 Sample text 
 
 
 8 Usage as common noun 
 9 See also 
 10 References 
 11 External links 
 
 11.1 Portal 
 11.2 Summaries 
 11.3 The original Volapük 
 11.4 The 1931 revised Volapük 
 11.5 Tutorials 
 11.6 Handbooks, grammars and dictionaries 
 11.7 Volapük links and bibliographies 
 11.8 Discussions 
 
 
 
 
 
 Orthography and pronunciation  
 
 
 
  
Schleyer proposed alternate forms for the umlaut vowels, but they were rarely used. 
 
 
 The alphabet is as follows:  
 
 
 
 
 
 letter 
 IPA 
 
 
 a 
  
 
 
 ä 
  
 
 
 b 
  
 
 
 c 
  
 
 
 d 
  
 
 
 e 
  
 
 
 f 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 letter 
 IPA 
 
 
 g 
  
 
 
 h 
  
 
 
 i 
  
 
 
 j 
  
 
 
 k 
  
 
 
 l 
  
 
 
 m 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 letter 
 IPA 
 
 
 n 
  
 
 
 o 
  
 
 
 ö 
  
 
 
 p 
  
 
 
 (r) 
  
 
 
 s 
  ) 
 
 
 t 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 letter 
 IPA 
 
 
 u 
  
 
 
 ü 
  
 
 
 v 
  
 
 
 x 
  
 
 
 y 
  
 
 
 z 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 That is, the vowel letters ä, ö, ü have the pronunciations they do in German. C is pronounced like English j , and j like English sh . /s/ is pronounced  after voiced consonants, for example bs, ds, gs, ls , as it is in English. R was not found in the original proposal. 
 Note: ä , ö , and ü do not have alternative forms such as the ae , oe , and ue of German . 
 There are no diphthongs; each vowel letter is pronounced separately. 
 Special consonantal letters  
 The author Alfred A. Post mentions in his Comprehensive Volapük Grammar some additional letters created by Schleyer: 
 
 And the following letters are constructed by the inventor to designate sounds which occasionally occur&#160;– 
 
  
 Syllabic stress  
 Polysyllabic words are always stressed on the final vowel; for example, neai "never" is pronounced  . (However, the question clitic "-li" does not affect the stress of the word it attaches to.) Where there is secondary stress, as is found in the compounding of several roots together, it is found on the final syllable between the roots. 
 Letter r  
 The letter r was avoided in Schleyer's original Volapük, on the principle that it would be difficult for Chinese speakers to pronounce, and in the adoption of foreign roots r was generally changed to l . For example, English rose becomes lol . However, other uncommon phonemes, such as ö /ø/ and ü /y/ , were not avoided,  and Arie de Jong added /r/ in his 1929 revision of the language. Modern Volapük has minimal l–r pairs such as rel "religion" versus lel "iron". 
 Vocabulary  
 Schleyer adapted the vocabulary mostly from English , with a smattering of German and French . Some words remain readily recognizable for a speaker of one of the source languages, but many others are modified beyond easy recognition.  For instance, vol and pük are derived from the English words world and speak . Although unimportant linguistically, and regardless of the simplicity and consistency of the stress rule, these deformations were greatly mocked by the language's detractors. It seems to have been Schleyer's intention, however, to alter its loan words in such a way that they would be hard to recognise, thus losing their ties to the languages (and, by extension, nations) they came from. Conversely, Esperanto and Interlingua are commonly criticized as being much easier to learn for Europeans than for those with non-European native languages. 
 Grammar  
 The grammar is based on that of typical European languages, but with an agglutinative character: grammatical inflections are indicated by stringing together separate affixes for each element of meaning. 
 Nouns  
 Nouns inflect for case and number, but not for gender. 
 The following is the declension of the Volapük word vol "world": 
 
 
 Case 
 Singular 
 Plural 
 
 
 Nominative 
 vol (world) 
 vols (worlds) 
 
 
 Genitive 
 vola (of the world) 
 volas (of the worlds) 
 
 
 Dative 
 vole (to the world) 
 voles (to the worlds) 
 
 
 Accusative 
 voli (world) 
 volis (worlds) 
 
 
 As in German , the Volapük noun has four cases: nominative , genitive , dative and accusative . In compound words, the first part of the compound is usually separated from the second by the genitive termination -a , e.g.,&#160; Vola-pük , "of-world language". However, the other case endings ( -e dative, -i accusative) are sometimes used, or the roots may be agglutinated in the nominative, with no separating vowel. 
 Adjectives and adverbs  
 Adjectives , formed by the suffix -ik , normally follow the noun they qualify. They do not agree with the noun in number and case in that position, but do if they precede the noun, are separated from it by intervening words, or stand alone. Adverbs are formed by suffixing -o , either to the root or to the adjectival -ik ( gudik "good", gudiko "well"); they normally follow the verb or adjective they modify. 
 Pronouns  
 The pronouns begin with o-. In the singular, they are ob "I", ol "thou", om "he/it", of "she", os (impersonal),   on "one", ok "oneself". They are pluralized with -s : obs "we", oms "they". The possessive may be formed with either the genitive -a or with adjectival -ik : oba or obik "my". Prepositions, conjunctions and interjections are also formed from noun roots by appending appropriate suffixes. 
 Verbs  
 The verb carries a fine degree of detail, with morphemes marking tense , aspect , voice , person , number and (in the third person) the subject's gender . However, many of these categories are optional, and a verb can stand in an unmarked state. A Volapük verb can be conjugated in 1,584 ways (including infinitives and reflexives). 
 
 Person 
 
 For the simple present, the pronouns are suffixed to the verb stem: 
 
 binob I am, binol thou art, 
 
 etc. The present passive takes the prefix pa- : 
 
 palöfons they are loved. 
 
 
 Tense, aspect, and voice 
 
 The three tenses in the indicative , and the three perfect aspects, each take a characteristic vowel prefix: 
 
 
 Tense 
 Prefix 
 
 
 Present 
 a- 
 
 
 Past 
 ä- 
 
 
 Present perfect 
 e- 
 
 
 Past perfect 
 i- 
 
 
 Future 
 o- 
 
 
 Future perfect 
 u- 
 
 
 The present-tense prefix is omitted in the active voice, so: 
 
 binob I am, äbinol you were, ebinom he has been, ibinof she had been, obinos it will be, ubinon one will have been. 
 
 These are seen as being more distant from the present tense the further the vowel is from  in vowel space , and they can be used with temporal words to indicate distance in the past or future. For example, from del 'day', 
 
 adelo today, odelo tomorrow, udelo the day after tomorrow, ädelo yesterday, edelo the day before yesterday, idelo three days ago. 
 
 The passive voice is formed with p- , and here the a is required for the present tense: 
 
 palöfob I am loved, pälogol you were seen, pologobs we will be seen. 
 
 
 Infinitive mood 
 
 The infinitive is formed with the suffix -ön . It can be combined with tense/aspect prefixes: 
 
 Logön to see, elogön to have seen. 
 
 
 Interrogative mood 
 
 Yes–no questions are indicated with the particle li : 
 
 Pälogom-li was he seen? 
 
 The hyphen indicates that the syllable li does not take stress. It occurs before the verb to avoid a sequence of three consonants or a double el: li-pälogol? li-binoms? 
 
 Participles and the habitual aspect 
 
 Participles, both active and passive, are formed in -öl : 
 
 Logöl seeing, elogöl having seen, ologöl being about to see, palogöl seen (being seen), pelogöl seen (having been seen), pologöl about to be seen. 
 
 Binob penöl is literally 'I am writing', though penob is also used. For "I write" as habitual action, the habitual aspect is used. This is formed by adding -i- after the tense prefix, and here again the present-tense a- is required. The forms are thus active ai-, äi-, ei-, ii-, oi-, ui-, passive pai-, päi-, pei-, pii-, poi-, pui-. All are pronounced as two syllables. 
 
 Aifidob bodi I eat bread (as a daily occurrence), äipenob penedis I used to write letters. 
 
 With temporal words, 
 
 aidelo daily (at the present time) 
 
 
 The imperative moods 
 
 The imperative -öd follows the person suffix: 
 
 Gololöd! Go! (to one person), gololsöd! go! (to more than one person) 
 
 Optative -ös is used for courteous requests, and jussive -öz an emphatic command. 
 
 Conditional mood 
 
 Conditionals are formed with -la for the protasis ( if -clause) and -öv for the apodosis ( then -clause): 
 
 If äbinob-la liegik, äbinoböv givik – if I were rich I would be generous. 
 Ibinomöv givik, if ibinom-la liegik – he would have been generous if he had been rich. 
 
 Note that the tense changes as well, so that in the first example the past tense is used even though the present tense is intended. Like the question particle, the -la is written with a hyphen to indicate that it is not stressed in speech. 
 
 Potential mood 
 
 A potential mood is formed with -öx : 
 
 Pelomöx he might pay. 
 
 
 Reflexive verbs 
 
 Reflexive forms are made from the active voice and the pronoun ok : 
 
 Vatükob I wash, vatükobok (or vatükob obi ) I wash myself. 
 
 In the third person, the periphrastic form of vatükomok (he washes himself) must use the reflexive pronoun, vatükom oki , as vatükom omi would mean "he washes him (someone else)". 
 The plural -s may precede or follow the reflexive, as the speaker chooses: 
 
 vatükomoks or vatükomsok they wash themselves. 
 
 Here there is a meaningful distinction between joining the pronoun to the verb, and inflecting it independently: 
 
 Löfobsok we love ourselves, löfobs obis we love each other. 
 
 
 Gerundive 
 
 The gerundive arguments  are active ö- , passive pö- . 
 History  
 
 
 
  
Commemorative inscription for J. M. Schleyer on the wall of the parsonage in Litzelstetten, Constance , written in Volapük and German: 
 Menade bal&#160;– püki bal 
Eine Menschheit&#160;– eine Sprache 
(One mankind&#160;– one language) 
 
 
 
 Schleyer first published a sketch of Volapük in May 1879 in Sionsharfe , a Catholic poetry magazine of which he was editor. This was followed in 1880 by a full-length book in German. Schleyer himself did not write books on Volapük in other languages, but other authors soon did. 
 André Cherpillod writes of the third Volapük convention, 
 
 In August 1889 the third convention was held in Paris . About two hundred people from many countries attended. And, unlike in the first two conventions, people spoke only Volapük. For the first time in the history of mankind, sixteen years before the Boulogne convention , an international convention spoke an international language.  
 
 The Dutch cryptographer Auguste Kerckhoffs was for a number of years Director of the Academy of Volapük , and introduced the movement to several countries. However, tensions arose between Kerckhoffs and others in the Academy, who wanted reforms made to the language, and Schleyer, who insisted strongly on retaining his proprietary rights. This led to schism, with much of the Academy abandoning Schleyer's Volapük in favor of Idiom Neutral and other new constructed language projects. Another reason for the decline of Volapük may have been the rise of Esperanto . In 1887 the first Esperanto book ( Unua Libro ) was published. Many Volapük clubs became Esperanto clubs.  
 By 1890 the movement was in disarray, with violent arguments among the members. Schleyer resigned from the Volapük Academy and created a rival academy. Derived languages such as Nal Bino , Balta, Bopal, Spelin, Dil and Orba were invented and quickly forgotten.  
 
 
 
 A charming young student of Grük 
 Once tried to acquire Volapük 
 But it sounded so bad 
 That her friends called her mad, 
 And she quit it in less than a wük. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
1898 broadsheet advertising Volapük. 
 
 
 In the 1920s, Arie de Jong , with the consent of the leaders of the small remnant of Volapük speakers, made a revision of Volapük which was published in 1931 (now called Volapük Nulik "New Volapük" as opposed to the Volapük Rigik 'Original Volapük' of Schleyer). This revision was accepted by the few speakers of the language. De Jong simplified the grammar, eliminating some rarely used verb forms, and eliminated some gendered pronouns and gendered verb endings. He also rehabilitated the phoneme /r/ and used it to make some morphemes more recognizable. For instance, lömib "rain" became rein .  Volapük enjoyed a brief renewal of popularity in the Netherlands and Germany under de Jong's leadership, but was suppressed (along with other constructed languages) in countries under Nazi rule and never recovered. 
 Regarding the success of this artificial language, the Spanish scientist Santiago Ramón y Cajal wrote in the first edition of his Tonics of Willingness , in 1898: 
 
 "Nowadays, many scientific papers are published in more than six languages. To the likely attempt of restoring Latin or using Esperanto as the universal language of science, wise men have responded by multiplying the number of languages in which scientific works are published. We have to acknowledge that Volapük or Esperanto are practically one more language to be learnt. This result was predictable because neither the essentially popularized and democratic tendencies of modern knowledge, nor the economic views of authors and editors consent in a different way."  
 
 However, some years later (1920), in the third edition of the same book, he added the following footnote to the former assertion: "As it was presumable, nowadays -1920-, the brand new Volapük has been forgotten definitively. We forecast the same for Esperanto." 
 Large Volapük collections are held by the International Esperanto Museum  
 In December 2007 it was reported that the Volapük version of Wikipedia had recently jumped to 15th place among language editions, with more than 112,000 articles.  
 There has been a continuous Volapük speaker community since Schleyer's time, with an unbroken succession of Cifals (leaders). These were: 
 
 Johann Martin Schleyer 1879–1912 
 Albert Sleumer 1912–1948 
 Arie de Jong (provisionally) 1947–1948,  
 Jakob Sprenger 1948–1950 
 Johann Schmidt 1950–1977 
 Johann Krüger 1977–1983 
 Brian Bishop 1984–present 
 
 Examples  
 The Lord's Prayer  
 
 
 1880 Schleyer Volapük 
 1930 de Jong Volapük 
 
 
 O Fat obas, kel binol in süls, 
 O Fat obas, kel binol in süls! 
 
 
 paisaludomöz nem ola! 
 Nem olik pasalüdükonöd! 
 
 
 Kömomöd monargän ola! 
 Regän ola kömonöd! 
 
 
 Jenomöz vil olik, äs in sül, i su tal! 
 Vil olik jenonöd, äsä in sül, i su tal! 
 
 
 Bodi obsik vädeliki givolös obes adelo! 
 Givolös obes adelo bodi aldelik obsik! 
 
 
 E pardolös obes debis obsik, 
 E pardolös obes döbotis obsik, 
 
 
 äs id obs aipardobs debeles obas. 
 äsä i obs pardobs utanes, kels edöbons kol obs. 
 
 
 E no obis nindukolös in tendadi; 
 E no blufodolös obis, 
 
 
 sod aidalivolös obis de bad. 
 ab livükolös obis de bad! 
 
 
 
 (Ibä dutons lü ol regän, e nämäd e glor jü ün laidüp.) 
 
 
 Jenosöd! 
 So binosös! 
 
 
 Sample text  
 Ven lärnoy püki votik, vödastok plösenon fikulis. Mutoy ai dönu sukön vödis nesevädik, e seko nited paperon. In dil donatida, ye, säkäd at pebemaston, bi tradut tefik vöda alik pubon dis vöds Volapükik. Välot reidedas sökon, e pamobos, das vöds Volapükik pareidons laodiko. Gramat e stabavöds ya pedunons in nüdug; too loged viföfik traduta pakomandos ad garanön, das sinif valodik pegeton. Binos prinsip sagatik, kel sagon, das stud nemödik a del binos gudikum, ka stud mödik süpo. 
 Translation : When one is learning another language, vocabulary presents difficulties. One must continuously search for unknown words, and consequently interest is lost. In the elementary part, however, this problem has been overcome, because the relevant translation of each word appears below the Volapük words. A selection of readings follows, and it is suggested that the Volapük words be read out loud. The grammar and a basic vocabulary have already been done in the introduction; nevertheless, a quick glance at the translation is recommended to ensure that the overall meaning has been acquired. There is a maxim which states that a little study a day is better than a lot of study all at once. 
 Usage as common noun  
 The word Volapük is also used to mean "nonsense" and "gibberish" in certain languages, such as Danish  
 See also  
 
 
 
  
 Languages portal 
 
 
  
 Constructed languages portal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Volapük edition of Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 Volapuk encoding 
 Volapük Wikipedia 
 
 
 References  
 
 
 ^  a   b  "Pük, Memory: Why I Learned a Universal Language No One Speaks" by Paul LaFarge. The Village Voice , August 2000. 
 ^  OED 
 ^  Handbook of Volapük , Charles E. Sprague (1888) 
 ^  A History of the English Language, 5th ed. Albert C. Baugh and Thomas Cable. Ch.&#160;I English Present and Future ; Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River (2002) 
 ^  The Loom of Language F.&#160;Bodmer and L.&#160;Hogben (eds.) Ch.&#160;XI Pioneers of Language Planning ; Allen &amp; Unwin Ltd, London (1944) 
 ^  Sprague (1888) 
 ^  Front rounded vowels such as /y/ and /ø/ occur in only 7.10% of the languages in the UCLA Phonological Segment Inventory Database .  
 ^  "For example, while it is true that words like vol and pük don't really look like world and speak, but the whole language is not like that. Scores of words are very obvious as what they mean&#160;– if, fasilik, gudik/badik, smalik, jerik (pronounced sherík&#160;– expensive), bank, bäk (back), deadik".&#160;– "What the L!" , AUXLANG list posting by Thomas Alexander, 15 November 2005. 
 ^  Os is used for cases where the pronoun has no obvious antecedent, such as "I swear it", and perhaps with impersonal verbs . Om is used for abstract things such as lit "light". 
 ^  a   b  Foreword to Konciza Gramatiko de Volapuko , André Cherpillod. Courgenard, 1995. 
 ^  a   b  Arika Okrent (December 15, 2012). "Trüth, Beaüty and Volapük" . berfrois . Retrieved 2013-04-24 . &#160; 
 ^  Arie de Jong's Revision of Volapük (1931) by Ed Robertson 
 ^  Ramón y Cajal, S. (2009): Tonics of Willingness: Rules and Advices about Scientific Investigation . Formación Alcalá: Alcalá la Real, Jaén. 
 ^  Collection for Planned Languages (in German) 
 ^  Volapük Collection - American Philosophical Society 
 ^  "Ciekawe wydarzenia w Internecie" . PC World (Polish) (in Polish). December 1, 2007 . Retrieved 2013-04-26 . &#160; 
 ^  Yves Nevelsteen (2007-09-15). "Volapuko jam superas Esperanton en Vikipedio" . Libera Folio (in Esperanto) . Retrieved 2013-04-26 . &#160; 
 ^  R.L.G. (7 March 2013). "The keenest Wikipedians" . The Economist . Retrieved 2013-04-26 . &#160; 
 ^  http://www.volapük.com/kadam/Dalebud_Cifala_de_1947-01-15,_Num-_1.html 
 ^  http://www.volapük.com/kadam/Dalebud_Cifala_de_1950-12-21,_Num-_4.html 
 ^  "The Hardest Natural Languages" by Arnold L. Rosenberg (1979) 
 ^  Burger, Harald, et al. Phraseologie. ISBN 978-3-11-019076-2 . 
 
 
 External links  
 
 
 
 Wikisource has original text related to this article:
 Hand-book of Volapük 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Volapük repository of Wikisource , the free library 
 
 
 
 
 Find more about Volapük at Wikipedia's sister projects 
 
 
  
 Definitions and translations from Wiktionary 
 
 
  
 Media from Commons 
 
 
  
 Quotations from Wikiquote 
 
 
  
 Source texts from Wikisource 
 
 
  
 Textbooks from Wikibooks 
 
 
  
 Learning resources from Wikiversity 
 
 
 Portal  
 
 A Volapük portal 
 
 Summaries  
 
 Blueprints for Babel: Volapük &#160;– A summary of the grammar of Volapük 
 Chapter on Volapük in Otto Jespersen 's pro Novial An International Language (1928) 
 Article on Volapük from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica 
 Philipp Engert und Leonard Schwägerl (Hrsg.): Schleyer und Volapük - Geschichte und Linguistik. Seminarkurs 2012/2013 Martin-Schleyer-Gymnasium, Lauda-Königshofen. Verlag tredition GmbH Hamburg 2013; ISBN 978-3-8495-7238-9 
 
 The original Volapük  
 
 Charles Sprague, 1888, Hand-Book of Volapük 
 
 The 1931 revised Volapük  
 
 Summary of "Arie de Jong's Revision of Volapük (1931)" by Ed Robertson. From the 21st edition of the Journal of Planned Languages , 1995. 
 
 Tutorials  
 
 A ten-lesson course in modern Volapük 
 Ralph Midgley's web-page 
 A complete Italian grammar of Schleyer's original Volapük 
 
 Handbooks, grammars and dictionaries  
 
 Gramat Volapüka - by Arie de Jong&#160;– Volapük Nulik 
 Wörterbuch der Weltsprache: Vödabuk Volapüka - by Arie de Jong&#160;– Volapük Nulik 
 English–Volapük dictionary &#160;– Compiled by Ralph Midgley (1998)&#160;– Volapük Nulik 
 Vocabulary &#160;– Volapük Rigik 
 A complete Italian grammar of Volapük (1888) by V. Amoretti &#160;– Volapük Rigik 
 A Hand-book of Volapük , by Andrew Drummond &#160;– comic historical novel. ISBN 1-904598-67-6 &#160;– Volapük Rigik 
 
 Volapük links and bibliographies  
 
 Volapük links page 
 Full-text Volapük works at the Internet Archive 
 
 Discussions  
 
 Volapükalised &#160;– A Volapük group on Yahoo!, general discussion in Volapük about any topic and about Volapük in various other languages 
 Volapük Facebook Group 
 IRC chat channel in Volapük 
 Blog in Volapük 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 t 
 e 
 
 
 Constructed languages (conlangs) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Types and concepts 
 
 
 
 Artistic language 
 Constructed script 
 Engineered language 
 Fictional language 
 International auxiliary language (IAL) 
 Language game 
 Musical language 
 Relexification 
 Universal language 
 Zonal language 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Conlangs 
 
 
 
 Afrihili 
 Atlantean 
 Balaibalan 
 Blissymbols 
 Brithenig 
 Damin 
 Dothraki 
 Enochian 
 Esperanto 
 Glosa 
 Idiom Neutral 
 Ido 
 Interlingua 
 Ithkuil ( Ilaksh ) 
 Kalaba-X 
 Kēlen 
 Klingon 
 Láadan 
 Languages of Middle-earth 
 Langue nouvelle (1765) 
 Lingua Franca Nova 
 Lingua Ignota 
 Loglan 
 Lojban 
 Na'vi 
 Nadsat 
 Nal Bino 
 Neo 
 Novial 
 Occidental 
 Quenya 
 Ro 
 Sambahsa 
 Sindarin 
 Slovianski 
 Solresol 
 Sona 
 Spokil 
 Talossan 
 Teonaht 
 Toki Pona 
 Tsolyáni 
 Uropi 
 Valyrian 
 Verdurian 
 Volapük 
 Wenedyk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Resources 
 
 
 
 Codes for constructed languages 
 Conlanger 
 Language Creation Conference 
 Language Creation Society 
 Zompist.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Portal 
 WikiProject 
 List of constructed languages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 								 
				Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Volapük&amp;oldid=596438394 "				 
												 Categories : Languages with ISO 639-2 code Languages with ISO 639-1 code Constructed languages International auxiliary languages Volapük  Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2014 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2010  												 
							 
		 
		 
			 Navigation menu 
			 
				 
	 Personal tools 
	 
 Create account Log in 	 
 
				 
					 
	 Namespaces 
	 
					 Article 
					 Talk 
			 
 
 
	 
		 
	 Variants 
	 
		 
					 
	 
 
				 
				 
					 
	 Views 
	 
					 Read 
					 Edit 
					 View history 
			 
 
 
	 Actions 
	 
		 
					 
	 
 
 
	 Search 
	 
					 
					 		 
	 
 
				 
			 
			 
					 
				 
	 Navigation 
	 
		 
			 Main page 
			 Contents 
			 Featured content 
			 Current events 
			 Random article 
			 Donate to Wikipedia 
			 Wikimedia Shop 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Interaction 
	 
		 
			 Help 
			 About Wikipedia 
			 Community portal 
			 Recent changes 
			 Contact page 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Tools 
	 
		 
			 What links here 
			 Related changes 
			 Upload file 
			 Special pages 
			 Permanent link 
			 Page information 
			 Data item 
 Cite this page 		 
	 
 
 
	 Print/export 
	 
		 
			 Create a book 
			 Download as PDF 
			 Printable version 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Languages 
	 
		 
			 Afrikaans 
			 አማርኛ 
			 العربية 
			 Aragonés 
			 Azərbaycanca 
			 Беларуская 
			 Български 
			 Boarisch 
			 Català 
			 Čeština 
			 Cymraeg 
			 Dansk 
			 Deutsch 
			 Eesti 
			 Ελληνικά 
			 Español 
			 Esperanto 
			 Euskara 
			 فارسی 
			 Français 
			 Frysk 
			 Gaeilge 
			 客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî 
			 한국어 
			 Հայերեն 
			 हिन्दी 
			 Hrvatski 
			 Ido 
			 Bahasa Indonesia 
			 Interlingua 
			 Interlingue 
			 Íslenska 
			 Italiano 
			 עברית 
			 ქართული 
			 Қазақша 
			 Коми 
			 Kurdî 
			 Latina 
			 Latviešu 
			 Lietuvių 
			 Limburgs 
			 Lojban 
			 Magyar 
			 Македонски 
			 Malagasy 
			 مازِرونی 
			 Bahasa Melayu 
			 Dorerin Naoero 
			 Nederlands 
			 Nedersaksies 
			 日本語 
			 Нохчийн 
			 Norsk bokmål 
			 Norsk nynorsk 
			 Novial 
			 Occitan 
			 پنجابی 
			 Piemontèis 
			 Polski 
			 Português 
			 Qırımtatarca 
			 Română 
			 Rumantsch 
			 Русский 
			 Shqip 
			 Simple English 
			 Slovenčina 
			 Slovenščina 
			 Словѣньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟ 
			 Српски / srpski 
			 Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски 
			 Suomi 
			 Svenska 
			 தமிழ் 
			 ไทย 
			 Türkçe 
			 Українська 
			 Vèneto 
			 Tiếng Việt 
			 Volapük 
			 中文 
			 
			 Edit links 
		 
	 
 
			 
		 
		 
							 
											 This page was last modified on 21 February 2014 at 03:28. 
											 Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. 
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
									 
							 
											 Privacy policy 
											 About Wikipedia 
											 Disclaimers 
											 Contact Wikipedia 
											 Developers 
											 Mobile view