All About Lily Chou-Chou - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 





 
 
		 
		 
		 
			 
			 
						 
						 All About Lily Chou-Chou 
			 
								 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
								 
												 
					Jump to:					 navigation , 					 search 
				 
				 
 
 All About Lily Chou-Chou 
 
 
  
 Theatrical release poster 
 
 
 
 Directed by 
 Shunji Iwai 
 
 
 Produced by 
 Koko Maeda 
 
 
 Written by 
 Shunji Iwai 
 
 
 Starring 
 Hayato Ichihara 
 Shugo Oshinari 
 Ayumi Ito 
 Takao Osawa 
 Miwako Ichikawa 
 Izumi Inamori 
 Yū Aoi 
 
 
 Cinematography 
 Noboru Shinoda 
 
 
 Editing by 
 Yoshiharu Nakagami 
 
 
 Distributed by 
 Rockwell Eyes 
 
 
 Release dates 
 2001 
 
 
 Running time 
 146 min 
 
 
 Language 
 Japanese 
 
 
 All About Lily Chou-Chou ( リリイ・シュシュのすべて , Rirī Shushu no Subete ? ) is a 2001 Japanese film, written and directed by Shunji Iwai , that portrays the lives of 14-year-old students in Japan and the effect the enigmatic singer Lily Chou-Chou 's music has on some of them. 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 
 
 1 Plot 
 2 Production 
 3 Music 
 4 Cast 
 5 Details 
 6 Awards and nominations 
 7 Box office totals 
 8 External links 
 
 
 
 Plot  
 All About Lily Chou-Chou follows two boys, Shūsuke Hoshino and Yūichi Hasumi, from the start of junior middle school when they first meet, and into second grade. The film has a discontinuous storyline, starting midway through the story, just after the second term of junior high school begins, then flashes back to the first term and summer vacation, and then skips back to the present. 
 In elementary school, Hoshino was one of the best students in school, but was picked on by his classmates. Hoshino and Hasumi meet and become friends when they join the kendo club, and Hoshino invites Hasumi to stay over at his house. Hoshino's family is wealthy in comparison to Hasumi's family. Hasumi mistakes Hoshino's attractive young mother for his sister. 
 The kendo club summer camp training is tough, and Hoshino, Hasumi and some other first-grade boys decide to take a trip to Okinawa . Once there, Hoshino has a traumatic near-death experience and his personality changes from good-natured to dangerous and manipulative. Back at school in September for second term, he takes his place as class bully and shows his newfound power by ruining the lives of his classmates. An alternative voice, that of the character Sumika Kanzaki, attributes Hoshino's personality change to the collapse of his family's business and his parent's divorce; this matches several scenes connecting the decline of Hoshino – who has had to change his name – to divorce. 
 Hasumi, the confused and shy former friend of Hoshino, finds himself sucked into his now-tormentor's gang. He is ridiculed and coerced into doing Hoshino's dirty work, and finds solace only in the ethereal music Lily Chou-Chou makes, and acting as web editor for his fan website. Things become far worse for everyone when Hasumi is assigned to supervising Shiori Tsuda, whom Hoshino has blackmailed into enjo kōsai , and another girl is raped by Hoshino's lackeys after unwittingly offending the school's girl gang. The whole quagmire comes to a head when Hasumi heads to Tokyo to see a Lily Chou-Chou concert, where he encounters the last person he thought would be there. 
 The story of Hoshino and Hasumi is paralleled by messages posted to a Lily Chou-Chou message board which are displayed on screen. Until the meeting at the concert, it is left up to the viewer to figure out which characters in the story are posting under what names. 
 Production  
 On April 1, 2000, Shunji Iwai went live with his internet novel, in the form of a website called Lilyholic , where he posted messages as several characters on the BBS. Readers of the novel were free to post alongside Iwai's characters and interact with each other, indeed this BBS is where some of the content from the movie comes from. After the main incident in the novel took place, posting was closed and the second phase of the novel started, about the lives of 14-year-olds. (The novel is available on CD-ROM , but only in Japanese.) 
 Production on the film began in Ashikaga , Tochigi Prefecture on August 13, 2000 and ended on November 28, 2000. It premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival on September 7, 2001 and opened in Japan on October 6, 2001. 
 Iwai was the first Japanese director to use the, at the time, completely new digital video camera, the "24 Progressive" to shoot the film. 
 It is thought that Iwai was inspired to shoot in digital by his friend, the anime and live-action film director Hideaki Anno , who shot his own digital film entitled Love &amp; Pop , in 1998. Anno later cast Iwai as the lead in his second live-action film, Shiki-Jitsu . 
 Music  
 The soundtrack of Lily Chou-Chou was written and arranged by Takeshi Kobayashi , with vocals by the singer Salyu . It features a number of songs that are sung by the fictional rock star Lily Chou-Chou in the film. The soundtrack also makes heavy use of the classical music of Claude Debussy . 
 In 2010 Salyu and Takeshi Kobayashi released a new song under the YouTube name 'LilyChouChou2000', suggesting that the Lily Chou-Chou moniker was still alive. 
 Cast  
 
 Shugo Oshinari as Shūsuke Hoshino (星野修介 Hoshino Shūsuke ), the best student in school who, after a trip to Okinawa, becomes a bully. 
 Hayato Ichihara as Yūichi Hasumi (蓮見雄一 Hasumi Yūichi ), Hoshino's former friend who becomes a reluctant member of his gang and will later on be bullied by Hoshino. Yūichi is the leading character in the movie. He admins an online Lily Chou-Chou BBS and is a great fan of the singer. 
 Ayumi Ito as Yōko Kuno (久野陽子 Kuno Yōko ), a classmate of Yūichi's. A brilliant pianist, she is the envy of a clique of powerful girls, and therefore is also bullied. She is raped by Hoshino's gang and cuts off her hair as a way of avoiding Shiori Tsuda's fate. 
 Yū Aoi as Shiori Tsuda (津田詩織 Tsuda Shiori ), a classmate of Yūichi who gets blackmailed into enjo kōsai by Hoshino. Yūichi befriends her later on, and introduces her to Lily's music. Near the end of the movie she takes her life. 
 Yuki Ito as Kamino , one of the boys in the blue school uniforms at the train station when Kuno is introduced. 
 Izumi Inamori as Izumi Hoshino (星野いずみ Hoshino Izumi ), Hoshino's mother. It is unknown if she is single. She loves her son very much and welcomes Yūichi with open arms during a junior high sleepover at the Hoshino household. A classmate of Yūichi suggests that this is done to ensure that Yūichi will enjoy being Hoshino's friend. 
 Salyu as Lily Chou-Chou , the enigmatic and ethereal singer that Yūichi, Tsuda and others in the film are fans of. She is hardly seen in the film, except on a video screen near the story's end, but her music is heard throughout the movie. She is said by her fans to channel what is called "the Ether ", which is not unlike the invisible substance once thought by ancient philosophers to be the field that light travels through. This "ether" can be heard in the calm, melancholy songs she sings. 
 
 Details  
 
 Quentin Tarantino used the song "Kaifuku Suru Kizu (Wounds that heal)" from the Lily Chou-Chou soundtrack in Kill Bill , in the scene where the Bride views Hattori Hanzo 's sword collection. 
 The idea of Lily Chou-Chou the rock star was inspired by Faye Wong . 
 Extras at the concert scene were given an index card with extremely detailed information as to the thought process they should be going through during filming. There were hundreds of extras, partly made up of fans of the internet novel who had BBS meet ups during the day. Posters from the BBS are visible in the background of this scene and can be spotted by watching for clues from their posts. 
 Ayumi Ito spent weeks training on the piano in order to do all of her scenes without a double. She became so obsessed with Debussy 's " Arabesque No. 1 " that she made it her cell phone ringtone. 
 Originally, in the internet novel, Yūichi and Hoshino belong to the track team, not the kendo team. 
 Debussy wrote his famous Children's Corner Suite (1909) for his beloved daughter whom he nicknamed Chou-chou. 
 This movie made an impact and is the third highest grossing local film of 2001 in Japan (next to Visitor Q and Spirited Away ). This is the highest grossing film made by Shunji Iwai, beating his previous work, Love Letter (1995).  
 The movie's original runtime was 157 minutes, but the original print of the 157 minute version no longer exists because it was burned. The extra 11 minutes was composed of extra and intense footages of the rape scene, a scene with Yūichi in the beach (similar to Hoshino's drowning scene) and an extended funeral scene.  
 
 Awards and nominations  
 
 2002 Berlin International Film Festival – Panorama ( Shunji Iwai ) 
 2002 6th Shanghai International Film Festival – Best Music ( Takeshi Kobayashi ) and Special Jury Award (Shunji Iwai) 
 
 Box office totals  
 
 Budget: ¥150, 000, 000 ($1,249,656) 
 
 Local: 
 
 Japan : ¥3, 026, 188, 000 ($25,211,298) 
 Opening Week Gross: ¥514, 775, 000 ($4,288,612) 
 Date Released: October 6, 2001 
 In release: 15.7 weeks 
 
 International: 
 
 USA : $26,485 (¥3,179,328) 
 
 Rentals: 
 
 Japan : ¥810,340,000 ($6,750,436) 
 
 External links  
 
 Official site 
 All About Lily Chou-Chou at the Internet Movie Database 
 (Japanese) Salyu's official site 
 Fan site 'I Love Lily Chou-Chou' 
 "リリィ・シュシュのすべて ( Rirī Shushu no Subete )" (in Japanese). Japanese Movie Database . Archived from the original on 2 July 2007 . Retrieved 2007-07-21 . &#160; 
 "An Unreal Star Unleashes Real Teenagers' Brutality" -( New York Times review) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 t 
 e 
 
 
 The Cinema of Shunji Iwai 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1990s 
 
 
 
 Unknown Child 
 The Man Who Came to Kill 
 Ghost Soup 
 Maria 
 A Tin of Crab Meat 
 A Summer Solstice Story 
 Omelette 
 Fireworks, Should We See It from the Side or the Bottom? 
 Fried Dragon Fish 
 The Snow King 
 Undo 
 Lunatic Love 
 Love Letter 
 Picnic 
 Swallowtail 
 Moon Riders: Knit Cap Man 
 April Story 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2000s 
 
 
 
 All About Lily Chou-Chou 
 Jam Films 
 Hana and Alice 
 New York, I Love You 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Actor 
 
 
 
 Shiki-Jitsu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Producer 
 
 
 
 Rainbow Song 
 Halfway 
 Bandage 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Documentaries 
 
 
 
 The Kids Who Wanted to View Fireworks from Another Perspective 
 30 days with the Japanese National Football Team 
 The Kon Ichikawa Story 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Collaborators 
 
 
 
 Yu Aoi 
 Hayato Ichihara 
 Ayumi Ito 
 Takao Osawa 
 Noboru Shinoda 
 Takeshi Kobayashi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 								 
				Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=All_About_Lily_Chou-Chou&amp;oldid=590507175 "				 
												 Categories : Japanese-language films 2001 films Japanese films Films directed by Shunji Iwai Coming-of-age films  Hidden categories: Articles containing Japanese-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2009 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2007 Articles with Japanese-language external links  												 
							 
		 
		 
			 Navigation menu 
			 
				 
	 Personal tools 
	 
 Create account Log in 	 
 
				 
					 
	 Namespaces 
	 
					 Article 
					 Talk 
			 
 
 
	 
		 
	 Variants 
	 
		 
					 
	 
 
				 
				 
					 
	 Views 
	 
					 Read 
					 Edit 
					 View history 
			 
 
 
	 Actions 
	 
		 
					 
	 
 
 
	 Search 
	 
					 
					 		 
	 
 
				 
			 
			 
					 
				 
	 Navigation 
	 
		 
			 Main page 
			 Contents 
			 Featured content 
			 Current events 
			 Random article 
			 Donate to Wikipedia 
			 Wikimedia Shop 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Interaction 
	 
		 
			 Help 
			 About Wikipedia 
			 Community portal 
			 Recent changes 
			 Contact page 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Tools 
	 
		 
			 What links here 
			 Related changes 
			 Upload file 
			 Special pages 
			 Permanent link 
			 Page information 
			 Data item 
 Cite this page 		 
	 
 
 
	 Print/export 
	 
		 
			 Create a book 
			 Download as PDF 
			 Printable version 
		 
	 
 
 
	 Languages 
	 
		 
			 Français 
			 한국어 
			 Bahasa Indonesia 
			 Italiano 
			 日本語 
			 Simple English 
			 ไทย 
			 中文 
			 
			 Edit links 
		 
	 
 
			 
		 
		 
							 
											 This page was last modified on 13 January 2014 at 13:42. 
											 Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. 
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
									 
							 
											 Privacy policy 
											 About Wikipedia 
											 Disclaimers 
											 Contact Wikipedia 
											 Developers 
											 Mobile view